GIVE CONGRESS HORSE RACES, NOT DISTRACTED LAME DUCKS; 
TERM LIMITS: THE PROBLEM IS TOO LITTLE COMPETITION, NOT TOO MUCH LONGEVITY. 
Many Americans, apparently including President Bush, believe Congress functions 
poorly. Paradoxically, members of Congress are reelected at astonishingly high 
rates (96.2% of the House in 1990). A movement has arisen, therefore, that aims 
to limit constitutionally the number of terms an individual can serve. A 
majority of the American public, the very people whose votes give members of 
Congress permanent tenure, support the movement's goal. 
The movement, now supported by the President -- he favors a 12-year limit -- is 
unhealthy. Constitutional amendments are often dangerous because their 
consequences are unpredictable: Even good ones add to the bad habit of treating 
basic political structures as mere inconveniences to be challenged whenever 
they give temporary irritation. We should not seriously consider amendments 
unless they address a deep and evident need that we cannot meet through 
ordinary political action. 
What issue does a limitation on service address? That members of Congress today 
have been serving too long? Is long service a problem in itself? Length brings 
experience with all its benefits. It is not obvious that these benefits are 
simply outweighed by increased possibilities for lethargy and corruption. 
What, then, is the real problem? In part, we fear that our congressional 
representatives are not really being elected at all -- not that they are being 
elected too often. Increasing evidence suggests that the advantages of 
incumbency are so formidable that we have little choice during elections. The 
problem is too little competition, not too much longevity, and the potential 
arrogance resulting from job security that even a civil servant would envy. 
How should we increase competition for congressional seats? A number of answers 
are evident. 
 -- Campaign finance reform must become reality. Reforms would reduce the 
effects of narrowly focused and irresponsible political-action committees and 
increase the influence of parties and local residents. The opportunity to fight 
elections through a sensible combination of principled debate and local 
interest would be increased. 
 -- We should pay more attention to the way the states propose to "redistrict" 
following this year's census. Fewer gerrymandered congressional districts might 
have a salutary effect on congressional competition and honest representation. 
 -- Congress could substantially reform its franking privilege, a device that 
peppers constituents with thousands of pieces of propaganda thinly disguised as 
information. There was much talk of this last year but the franking budget 
remains too large. 
 -- Finally, if Congress could discipline itself by following serious rules for 
debate and legislation, considering all measures and amendments through open 
discussions and reduce its staff, our legislators would be forced to rely more 
on their own wit, judgment and principles. This would also allow citizens to 
see what their representatives are really made of and stand for. The 
opportunities for choice and competition would increase; so would opportunities 
for thoughtful legislation. 
A term-limitation amendment would do little to increase electoral competition 
but would have several harmful consequences. One is that the number of lame 
ducks would increase. Would lame-duck senators or representatives be more 
attentive or less? More likely to be principled, or more likely to be 
eccentric? More ready to serve the community from which they come, or more 
eager to serve the interest by whom they wish to be employed? No one can say 
with confidence. Why risk an unpredictable change in congressional action to 
meet a problem that can be dealt with without constitutional change? 
More certain is the harmful effect that such an amendment would have on 
Washington's power structure. In a government where experience often translates 
into dominance, most neophyte congressmen would be at the mercy of experienced 
staff. In fact, congressional staff members would not be the only unelected 
officials to benefit from this amendment; bureaucrats would also rush in where 
members of Congress were ill-equipped to tread. The result, in short, would be 
that almost everyone in Washington with the desire to exercise more power would 
be better able to do so -- except, of course, those elected for that purpose. 
Another unwelcome consequence of this amendment would be unnecessary 
restriction of democratic choice. American political institutions are based on 
the principle of consent, and consent in large part means choice in the voting 
booth. Choice, indeed, is often, and properly, "structured" (that is, 
restricted), as through the Electoral College. This is done to encourage 
citizens to choose wisely. But how would this amendment make American voters 
more responsible? 
An amendment of this sort also restricts democratic choice in a more subtle 
way, by making a career of public service less attractive. Men of potential 
public excellence -- the "men of parts" who were predisposed not to enter our 
public life, as Toqueville observed -- might be even less likely to enter if 
their opportunity for achievement and renown were curtailed. Our goal, after 
all, is to elect wise men and women. 
