BEVERLY HILLS LOAN BROKER CONVICTED IN S&amp;L FAILURE 
Albert Yarbrow, a Beverly Hills-based loan broker, was convicted on eight 
counts of conspiracy, wire and mail fraud and other charges, all stemming from 
his role in the largest financial institution failure in Oregon history. 
Yarbrow was the last of four defendants to be tried for their roles in the 1985 
collapse of State Federal Savings and Loan Assn. of Corvalis, Ore. 
"The conduct of these people caused the failure of State Federal," said Lance 
Caldwell, a Portland-based U.S. attorney. 
Regulators have previously estimated that State Federal, which had $550 million 
in assets when it failed, will cost the thrift industry's insurance fund $150 
million. 
The bulk of the thrift's problems stemmed from a series of loans made to Thomas 
Edward Nevis, a real estate developer introduced to the thrift by Yarbrow, 
according to the indictment. 
Yarbrow, who collected fees on the loans State Federal made to Nevis, acted as 
a "straw borrower," applying for a $12.2-million loan on Nevis' behalf, 
according to the indictment. This fraudulent process allowed Nevis to fool 
savings and loan regulators, who would not allow thrifts to lend more than a 
specific amount to any one borrower. 
Yarbrow escaped liability to repay the loan by creating a dummy corporation 
called Roswell Properties Inc., "which would have no assets and no purpose 
other than to be a nominee for Nevis on the Roswell loan," according to the 
indictment. 
Meanwhile, Yarbrow collected a $200,000 fee for his role in getting Nevis the 
loan. 
Yarbrow was also charged and convicted of mail fraud because of a deal he made 
with State Federal officers to conceal another loan brokerage fee. (Yarbrow 
collected nearly $900,000 in loan fees from State Federal over a two-year 
period, according to federal investigators.) 
In this case, State Federal agreed to give Yarbrow an $88,000 Rolls-Royce in 
lieu of a fee, but Yarbrow convinced the thrift to send him a letter calling 
the payment a gift in order to avoid California income tax liability and 
Department of Motor Vehicle fees. 
Yarbrow's attorney, Howard Gillingham, refused to comment about the case. 
Yarbrow could not be reached. 
Yarbrow, whose conviction came last Friday in U.S. District Court in Portland, 
will be sentenced in early January, according to Caldwell. 
