SHEVARDNADZE TO SEE NATO HEADQUARTERS AT HIS OWN REQUEST 
Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze will make an unprecedented visit 
to NATO headquarters next week in a move symbolizing the end of the Cold War. 
"The Soviet foreign minister has requested that he be able to contact NATO 
during his visit to Belgium on Dec. 18 and 19," a NATO spokesman said today. 
"We are now trying to arrange for Mr. Shevardnadze to have a meeting with NATO 
Secretary-General Manfred Woerner on one of those two days." 
No Warsaw Pact minister has ever entered NATO headquarters and until recently 
the idea would have been dismissed as absurd. 
Earlier, the 16 NATO foreign ministers, on the first day of a two-day meeting, 
set aside a dispute between Greece and Turkey, clearing the way for the Western 
alliance to present a draft treaty on cutting conventional forces in Europe 
(CFE). 
The Warsaw Pact countries put forward their proposals at the CFE talks in 
Vienna today, several hours ahead of NATO. 
It was not known why Shevardnadze proposed the NATO visit. He is due to meet 
European Community foreign ministers in Brussels next Monday and to sign a 
trade agreement with the EC. 
A French official said the visit was discussed Wednesday evening at a dinner 
attended by the foreign ministers of Britain, France, the United States and 
West Germany. 
The official, who asked not to be named, said the ministers decided that 
Shevardnadze would first meet Woerner and then confer with all 16 ambassadors 
to NATO headquarters in Brussels. 
NATO diplomats said it was not immediately clear whether the 
Woerner-Shevardnadze talks would have a fixed agenda. "The visit has an obvious 
symbolic importance, though," one diplomat said. 
The two men are expected to discuss the changes sweeping Eastern Europe, the 
current state of arms control and East-West relations. 
The 16 ministers cleared the way for the NATO proposals on conventional-force 
reductions to be presented at Vienna. 
"A certain amount of time was spent reaching agreement on how we table the NATO 
draft in the CFE negotiations in Vienna which is being (presented) today, so 
that was settled," British Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd said. 
The draft was being held up because of a dispute between Greece and Turkey over 
whether to include the Turkish port of Mersin in the area for arms cuts. 
Hurd said the row had not been settled but both Greece and Turkey had agreed to 
set it aside so that the draft treaty could be tabled on behalf of all NATO 
members. 
The Western proposal envisages cutting American and Soviet troops in Europe to 
275,000 on each side and scrapping thousands of tanks, big guns and aircraft. 
The ceiling of 275,000 troops for each superpower was first proposed by 
President Bush in May. U.S. officials said then that it would involve a cut of 
30,000 men by the United States and 325,000 by the Soviet Union. 
Greece and Turkey are at loggerheads over Mersin because it is the main Turkish 
port for reinforcing the Turkish-backed, self-declared independent enclave of 
northern Cyprus. 
Greece wants the port to be included in the area for CFE reductions while 
Turkey wants to keep it out. 
