AGAINST THE SPIRIT OF THE GOSPEL 
Very little remains of Eastern Europe's once-thriving and deeply rooted Jewish 
communities. The Holocaust and subsequent emigration of most of the survivors 
of that unspeakable crime have left remnant Jewish populations of only a few 
thousand in countries where before World War II hundreds of thousands or even 
millions had flourished. But the near-disappearance of Jewish life has not 
produced the disappearance of anti-Semitism. In Romania and Hungary and most 
especially in Poland, the ancient bigotry has resurfaced. Jean-Paul Sartre's 
observation that if the Jew didn't exist the anti-Semite would invent him is 
again being validated. 
The reappearance of anti-Semitism in post-Communist Eastern Europe prompted an 
international conference in Prague three months ago between Roman Catholic and 
Jewish representatives. From it emerged a strong statement condemning 
anti-Semitism as "a sin against God and humanity." In his endorsement, which in 
part restated the declaration of the Second Vatican Council, Pope John Paul II 
acknowledged that some aspects of Catholic teaching had in fact fostered 
anti-Semitism, and called for strong efforts to combat its revival in Eastern 
Europe. 
Poland's Roman Catholic bishops have now produced a document, to be read in all 
of that country's churches on Jan. 20, that both condemns anti-Semitism and 
expresses regret over the cooperation by some Poles with Nazi mass murders of 
Jews a half-century ago. Those activities, the bishops wrote, "forever gnaw at 
our conscience." Acknowledgement of the role taken by some Poles in the 
Holocaust comes late, but may still help as a moral deterrent to the new 
anti-Semitism in Poland. 
Lech Walesa, who is to be sworn in today as that country's president, himself 
made comments during his campaign widely inferred to be anti-Jewish. Some of 
his followers left no doubts about their own anti-Jewish sentiments. This in a 
country where only about 6,000 Jews survive out of a prewar population of 3 
million. The old prejudices seem far from extinct in the new Poland. The Polish 
bishops' message that anti-Semitism is against the spirit of the gospel is one 
that can't be restated too often. 
