DIANNE KLEIN: MARRIAGE WILL SURVIVE, EVEN IF IRONMAN COMES CALLING 
Mickie Shapiro, a marriage, family and child therapist, gave me a call after 
reading my column about my husband's transformation from exercise dilettante to 
bicycling maniac. 
Mickie, who also teaches sports psychology at UC Irvine, has been there. Oh, 
the stories she could tell, about herself, her friends and her clients. 
Spouse A gets fed up with the usual work-eat-TV-sleep routine and starts 
exercising, vigorously. Spouse B, who thought things were fine just as they 
were, can't relate. 
Spouse B begins to resent all the time that Spouse A spends exercising, away 
from home and with God-only-knows whom. 
Then Spouse A starts saying things like: "If you'd start exercising yourself, 
you'd feel better and look better, too. I know I feel great." 
This is a couple in trouble. 
"So you think my marriage is on the rocks?" I ask Mickie. 
"Oh, no," she says. "I thought you sounded very supportive." 
I liked this woman immediately. Boy, did she have me down. Supportive, loving . 
. . I could go on. 
So I went to see Mickie at her home in Costa Mesa. I figured, what the heck, 
even an obviously well-adjusted person such as myself could use a couple of 
pointers now and then. 
Then when Mickie came to the door, something else popped into my mind. When we 
had talked on the phone, she'd mentioned something about having just competed 
in "Ironman." The truth was I had no idea what she had been talking about. 
I was ready to guess that Ironman was a new Saturday morning cartoon show 
before Mickie explained that it was a triathlon, essentially the athletic 
equivalent of taking the SAT, GRE and the bar exam back-to-back, for fun. 
All of this began to sink in when Mickie, 53, mother of four, greeted me at her 
front door. Jane Fonda should look this good. I wondered if Mickie's lack of 
superfluous padding made it difficult for her to sit for long distances. 
Let me tell you, exactly, what Ironman is so that you can better picture what 
I'm talking about. 
There are five of these triathlons in the world, in Japan, Canada, New Zealand, 
Germany and in Kona, Hawaii, the most rigorous of the bunch. That's where 
Mickie went, one of 1,250 lucky winners of previous competitions. 
It took her 14 hours and 45 minutes to swim 2.4 miles in the ocean, (they do 
that first so they don't drown), then pedal 112 miles on a bike and then run a 
marathon. 
"But it flows," she tells me. "It just goes. It's like the SAT. You get 
yourself prepared and you just do it." 
OK, by this time I must have had a look on my face or something. Mickie looks 
back. 
"When I first saw it, I thought it was ridiculous, crazy," she says. "I thought 
who would ever do that?" 
Exactly, Mickie. 
So this is my opening. I ask about the state of her marriage. 
Mickie, a woman who was raised for marriage and motherhood, says she is happily 
divorced. 
She has analyzed the reasons for this, of course, and concluded that her love 
of athletics, dawning almost by accident at the age of 40, is directly 
responsible. 
Running made her feel alive, invigorated. She gained confidence and made new 
friends. She entered competitions and came out a winner. 
But it wasn't like her husband opposed all this, she says. Fact is he was too 
supportive. 
"It felt real intrusive to me," Mickie says. "It was like he was making my 
accomplishments his own." 
Then she says her husband tried a little different approach. He started 
running, around the neighborhood, on his own. 
"But he was jogging," Mickie says. "He wasn't racing." 
So at this point in our conversation, I'm beginning to think about what Mickie 
had told me earlier. "Supportive," she had called me, and I, naively, had 
thought that was probably a good thing. 
"Then you wouldn't counsel someone like me to hop on a bike next to her 
husband?" I ask. 
"Oh, no," she says in a reassuringly emphatic tone. "He needs his own thing." 
I knew that, of course. I was just testing. Now I'm beginning to feel good 
about our talk. 
"The whole idea is that you have two equal partners," Mickie goes on. "Each 
partner should have their own interests, but at the same time they should be 
able to communicate with each other, share with each other. . . . The whole 
thing I preach is balance." Balance. Right. That sounds eminently reasonable. 
But then visions of Ironman pop into my head again. I give Mickie another look. 
"It's not possible to be a triathlete and have balance," she says, smiling. 
Right. I knew that. I may be supportive, but I'm not crazy. 
 Dianne Klein's column appears Wednesday, Friday and Sunday. Readers may reach 
Klein by writing to her at The Times Orange County Edition, 1375 Sunflower 
Ave., Costa Mesa, Calif. 92626, or calling (714) 966-7406. 
