NAVY FOILS GREENPEACE SHIP TO FIRE TRIDENT 2; 
DEFENSE: VESSEL RAMS HOLE IN ACTIVISTS' TUGBOAT AT LAUNCH SITE. COMMANDOS ALSO 
DISABLE PROTESTERS' RAFTS. 
The U.S. Navy successfully launched a Trident 2 missile from a submarine 
submerged off the coast of Florida on Monday, but not before ramming a hole in 
the side of a Greenpeace vessel and towing away protesters who sought to stop 
the test. 
Navy spokesmen say the launch of the $26.5-million missile from the submarine 
Tennessee put the troubled Trident program back on track after its last two 
test shots blew up seconds after they broke water. Monday's test firing could 
mean the Navy will meet a March deadline to load the first missile armed with a 
nuclear warhead on the Tennessee. 
The actual firing of the missile, which rocketed skyward at 10:20 a.m., was 
almost anticlimactic, however, following a two-hour battle at sea which began 
just after dawn in choppy waters about 50 miles east of Cape Canaveral. After a 
Navy submarine support ship put a 3-foot gash in the side of the environmental 
activists' 190-foot ocean-going tugboat and knocked out its engines by pouring 
water down its smokestacks, Navy commandos boarded two Greenpeace inflatable 
rafts, punctured the boats' pontoons and slashed fuel lines. 
The confrontation was the most serious yet between the Navy and Greenpeace, 
which has vowed to scuttle the $160-billion Trident missile program by 
preventing test launches. In July, the environmentalists did stop one launch by 
following the Tennessee out to sea in its tugboat, called Greenpeace, and 
sending out two inflatable rafts to positions above the submerged submarine. 
But on Monday, the Navy was ready. "We expected them to expect us, and it was 
clear from the start they were prepared," said Steve Shallhorn, coordinator for 
Greenpeace USA's Nuclear Free Seas campaign, who was aboard the tug. 
About 7 a.m., after Greenpeace Capt. Richard Whibley refused a Navy warning to 
leave the area, Shallhorn said the Grasp approached the Greenpeace's port side 
and "repeatedly rammed us, eight or ten times." When the tug began to take on 
water, a hole just above the waterline was plugged with mattresses, Greenpeace 
reported. 
Along with the Grasp, a second Navy vessel, the submarine rescue ship 
Kittiwake, rammed the tug on the starboard side, Shallhorn said. "They 
sandwiched us. They were there to disable the ship," he charged. 
At the same time, Shallhorn added, Navy crewmen used fire hoses to drench many 
of the 32 people aboard the Greenpeace, and also poured water down the ship's 
smokestacks. For a while, Shallhorn said, the Greenpeace was dead in the water. 
One engine was later started. 
For the next 90 minutes, Shallhorn said, the Greenpeace circled the area, 
evading the Navy vessels while launching two inflatable boats called Zodiacs, 
each with a two-man crew. When the Zodiacs hovered over the spot where the 
Tennessee had submerged -- marked by its antenna -- the Navy countered by 
sending out two boatloads of commandos dressed in camouflage and wearing 
visored helmets. After disabling the Zodiacs, the commandos towed the rafts 
back to the Greenpeace. 
Navy Vice Adm. Roger Bacon, commander of the Atlantic submarine fleet, told 
pool reporters aboard the amphibious transport dock Nashville, that the 
activists ignored "at least 50 and maybe more" warnings to leave the area. "We 
used the minimum force necessary to clear the area," he said. 
Bacon told Reuters news service that the Dutch-registered Greenpeace was 
"bumped and damaged" by the Grasp, which mistakenly rammed the Greenpeace while 
it sprayed the protest ship with water from fire hoses. 
There were no injuries in the encounter. Once the protesters' vessels were 
muscled outside the 5,000-yard diameter safety circle, the Tennessee fired the 
44-foot missile out of a tube in the deck. It broke the Atlantic surface, 
ignited and propelled a dummy warhead package to an ocean target several 
thousand miles away. 
Peter Bahouth, executive director of Greenpeace USA, called the Navy's action 
"a terrible outrage." 
"This is an unbridled act of aggression against a peaceful protest in 
international waters. The Navy's assertion that it was acting within 
international law is absolute nonsense. 
"Had our vessel belonged to a foreign government it would have been an act of 
war." 
The Greenpeace vessel limped toward port at Jacksonville on one engine Monday 
evening. But Shallhorn, evacuated from the ship by helicopter and interviewed 
by telephone from Cape Canaveral, said the environmentalists would not quit the 
fight. "The Navy may have won that tactical situation," he said. "But we'll see 
if this missile system ever gets put into production." 
