MEETERS, GOD-SPEEDERS ARE ADVISED TO AVOID LINDBERGH FIELD MESS 
Because of an expected crunch of people and traffic, Lindbergh Field 
authorities are urging travelers, families and friends to say their farewells 
at home instead of at the airport. 
About 37,000 holiday travelers are expected to pass through the airport today 
and again on Saturday. 
On an average day, about 30,000 fliers use the airport. Another 60,000 -- 
people the airline industry calls "meeters and God-speeders" -- are there to 
wish the traveler well, said Jim Anderson, a spokesman for the Port of San 
Diego, which operates the airport. 
"The airport has been pretty busy during the entire holiday period, but traffic 
is expected to peak today and tomorrow, and again Jan. 2 and 3 when travelers 
return home," he said. 
The parking lots will be full, Anderson said. "Plan on not leaving the car at 
the airport." 
Travelers should have someone drop them off at the airport, or they should take 
a cab or shuttle bus. Airport shuttles are available free from parking lots on 
Kettner Boulevard and in the downtown area that caters to airport travelers, he 
said. 
Also, the name of the game when dropping people off at the terminal curb is to 
drop them off and leave them there, or go to the parking lot and park, he said. 
Parking regulations that permit loading and unloading only will be strictly 
enforced. 
"Some people will park their car at the curb and then go look for the arriving 
party or take somebody into the terminal. The rule is you can pull up to curb, 
but you must be actively loading or unloading the car. Someone just sitting in 
the car is not active." 
To make travel less stressful, travelers should allow plenty of time to get to 
the airport. They should plan to arrive at least an hour before their 
departure, Anderson said. 
"Crowds are greater, and it takes longer to get into the terminal," he said. 
Also, if travelers should miss their flight, they may not be able to schedule 
another. "So many flights are booked," Anderson said. 
Travelers should also try to buy their tickets in advance so they can check 
their luggage at the curb and go directly to their departure gate. 
"It's also helpful for travelers to put Christmas packages in their luggage" 
instead of carrying them on board, Anderson said. Sometimes guards at the 
security checkpoints cannot determine what is in the package and may have to 
open it. 
The fewer the packages, the more time will be saved at security checkpoints, 
Anderson said. 
