GARDENING; 
TIPS, TOOLS TO HELP OLDER GARDENING ENTHUSIASTS 
Even the simplest gardening tasks -- like sowing seeds -- may become formidable 
as you grow old. But help is available, from special tools to expert advice, to 
keep your thumb green. 
Many gardeners devise their own ways to cope with, or avoid, the pain of 
pushing, pulling, handling, stooping, squatting and kneeling. 
As digital dexterity waned, I found tweezers indispensable to pick up tiny 
seeds and plant them just where I want them. And at least one company (Harris 
Seeds of Rochester, N.Y.) markets pelleted seeds encased in a white coating 
that makes them easier to see as well as handle. 
Some devices are expensive, but others require only ingenuity and make-do 
materials. For instance, you can stack three old tires and fill the hole in the 
middle with soil to make a planter just high enough for easy tending from a 
wheelchair. 
Gardening indoors under fluorescent lights gives you many of the benefits and 
few of the inconveniences, or the expense, of a greenhouse. You can start with 
a small two-tube unit and go as far as you want. Fluorescent stands of all 
sizes are available at garden centers and hardware stores, or you can make your 
own. My wife and I share a custom-made one along a wall of our dining room. She 
does flowers and I grow salad greens in the winter and start plants for summer. 
Raised-bed and container gardening also make chores easier. Craig Hospital of 
Englewood, Colo., has put out a booklet on raised-bed techniques, which, as the 
name implies, essentially involve planting above ground level. 
A similar pamphlet was published by the Horticulture Department of Virginia 
Polytechnic Institute in Blacksburg, Va. And the American Horticultural Therapy 
Assn. of Gaithersburg, Md., is a fruitful source of information for many 
aspects of gardening for the handicapped and elderly.A few years ago, the 
National Gardening Assn., of Burlington, Vt., put out a booklet called "Tools 
and Techniques for Easier Gardening." This is unfortunately out of print, but 
may still be available through libraries. 
Divided into sections on soil preparation, planting, weeding, cultivating, 
watering and harvesting, it lists scores of special tools and companies that 
market them. It also abounds with homespun suggestions from many sources. 
Helen Ashworth of Heuvelton, N.Y., for example, said a chair with boards 
attached to the legs so it wouldn't sink into the ground enabled her mother to 
hoe while sitting and thus continue gardening much longer than she expected. 
Eleanor Patterson of San Francisco suggested using barbecue tongs to pull 
weeds, transplant small plants or remove dead leaves from hard-to-reach areas. 
You can buy kneeling pads, make your own from a piece of foam rubber, or just 
use old cushions. Lightweight combination kneeler-sitters are available, easy 
to reverse and to grab onto to lower and lift yourself. Grips attached to the 
handles of shovels, hoes, spading forks or rakes reduce bending or arm strain. 
Hoes turned upside down become canes. 
Indoors, there are planter pulleys enabling you to lower and lift hanging 
plants and lock them into any position for watering or other tasks. 
If you regularly turn the soil of your vegetable garden, power tillers as light 
as 17 pounds make the chore easier. They come with various attachments, 
including lawn thatchers. But keeping a garden fertile by mulching with leaves, 
grass clippings and other composting material eliminates much toil involving 
heavy equipment. 
Perennials also may reduce the volume of work, especially in decorative 
gardening, but a couple of vegetables also come in this class. Asparagus beds 
may last 50 years and more; rhubarb also repeats year after year with 
practically no care. My modest asparagus patch, 20 years old, provided more 
than 700 spears this year in a harvest period lasting two months. All I do is 
lay down a mulch of salt hay to keep down weeds and fertilize once a year. 
Among plants that need sowing annually, squashes offer long-lasting harvests, 
as do broccoli, pole beans and tomatoes of indeterminate varieties. Some 
lettuces are cut-and-come-again types. Ditto for New Zealand spinach and Swiss 
chard. 
But the biggest help and encouragement for gardeners comes from the plants 
themselves. They want to live and grow. And they don't care whether you use 
tweezers to plant seeds or featherweight hoes to zap weeds. 
