L.A. ZOO JOINS GLOBAL EFFORT TO SAVE RHINOS 
One day in August, an unsuspecting female rhinoceros made its daily grub search 
through the jungles of Sumatra, Indonesia, fell into a pit and unwittingly 
volunteered for a breeding program intended to replenish the species. 
The rare rhinoceros was brought to the Los Angeles Zoo earlier this week, part 
of an international program to preserve endangered wildlife. Zookeepers said 
the unnamed 7-year-old will winter in the Southland before moving to a 
permanent home at the Bronx Zoo. 
On Friday, while the half-ton visitor splashed water and wallowed in mud at a 
pool side press conference in Los Angeles, zoo officials described the program 
to establish rhino breeding groups in four U.S. cities. 
Under an agreement between the Indonesian government and zoos in Cincinnati, 
San Diego, New York and Los Angeles, five males and five females will be sent 
to the United States as they are brought into captivity, said Jim Doherty, 
curator for the New York Zoological Society. 
A preserve also is being established in Indonesia, Los Angeles Zoo Director 
Warren Thomas said. 
To reduce climatic changes for the rhinos, Los Angeles has been the stopping 
place for the animals headed east, program officials said. In their natural 
habitat -- the humid rain forests of Southeast Asia -- temperatures range from 
80 to 95 degrees. 
The goal of the program is to ensure that the estimated 500 members of the 
Sumatran species do not die out and to help restore balance to a wildlife 
environment that has been upset by Indonesia's industrial and agricultural 
development, Thomas said. 
Doherty said that rhinos, along with "countless other species," are being 
squeezed out of their natural homeland, as rain forests are chopped down for 
lumber and to make room for cash crops such as palm oil plants. 
"There are animals that are going to disappear that haven't even been 
identified yet," the curator said. "It's really a problem with people. The 
damage is, in part, because people in countries such as our own are not as 
careful about conservation as we should be. We are the ones providing a major 
market for wood and wood products." 
