THE MALTA SUMMIT; 
MALTA: THE ISSUES 
Following are some of the issues likely to be discussed by President Bush and 
Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev when they meet on warships in Marsaxlokk 
Bay: 
 EASTERN EUROPE: The political upheaval in the Soviet-led East Bloc as Poland, 
Hungary, East Germany and Czechoslovakia move to lift the "Iron Curtain" and 
introduce democratic reforms. Bush is anxious to encourage the democratic 
transformation of the Communist states but does not want to be seen as 
undercutting Gorbachev's stature as the catalyst of change. Gorbachev seized 
the initiative a day before flying to Malta by proposing an all-European summit 
to discuss events in Eastern Europe. 
GERMAN REUNIFICATION: The opening of the Berlin Wall revived calls from West 
Germany for the two German states to be reunited, causing nervousness in some 
European capitals that the North Atlantic Treaty Organization alliance could be 
jeopardized. The Soviet Union has made clear that reunification is unacceptable 
at present, and White House aides have sought to play the issue down despite 
calls from some U.S. conservatives to press it. 
ARMS REDUCTIONS: Both sides have said no arms control deals would be signed at 
the summit. But U.S. defense officials are believed to be willing to cut their 
forces by 250,000 troops, 350 planes and 60 ships over the next four years. 
Officials say about half of about 300,000 U.S. troops in Europe could be 
withdrawn if relations improve with the Warsaw Pact states. 
NAVAL DISARMAMENT: In another pre-summit initiative, Gorbachev called for the 
two superpowers to withdraw their permanent naval forces from the 
Mediterranean. The United States adamantly refuses, saying this would hamper 
its ability to honor commitments to NATO allies. 
CENTRAL AMERICA: Secretary of State James A. Baker III says Soviet behavior in 
Central America is the biggest obstacle to improving U.S.-Soviet relations. The 
United States this week renewed accusations that Moscow is sending arms to 
left-wing governments and revolutionaries. The Soviet Union has denied 
supplying arms to guerrillas fighting the U.S.-backed government in El 
Salvador. 
TRADE: The Soviet Union wants the United States to waive a law denying Moscow 
favorable tariffs for its exports because of restrictions on Jewish emigration. 
Trade between the two superpowers is worth between $3 billion and $4 billion a 
year, much of it American grain. 
