TRANSPORTATION; 
BATTLE BREWS OVER PLAN TO USE ROAD FUNDS FOR MASS TRANSIT 
A five-syllable word being uttered by a new House committee chairman has 
truckers, road builders, auto clubs and other members of the highway lobby 
shuddering. 
Rep. Robert A. Roe (D-N.J.) advocates giving states the "flexibility" to spend 
federal highway funds on mass transit systems. Although many urban areas would 
love to do so, they cannot under current law. 
But that law expires Sept. 30. And Roe, who just became chairman of the House 
Public Works and Transportation Committee, will have a big hand in writing the 
new one. 
The flexibility issue is but one of many that Congress will tackle when it 
takes up legislation to reauthorize funding of highway and mass transit 
programs through fiscal 1996. 
With a five-year price tag that could top $100 billion, the legislation will be 
one of the most costly items on Congress' agenda when it convenes Jan. 3. 
BACKGROUND: Highway and mass transit interests have warred for years over 
divvying up federal gasoline tax revenues that flow into the Highway Trust 
Fund. Originally, the money was spent on road projects. But for more than a 
decade a fraction of the funds has been reserved for mass transit. 
Until recently, the gas tax was 9 cents per gallon; 8 of those pennies went for 
highways, 1 for public bus and rail systems. (Each cent per gallon generates 
about $1 billion.) 
The deficit reduction package passed by Congress earlier this year raised the 
gas tax by 5 cents per gallon. Half of that will go into the Highway Trust 
Fund. Highways will get 2 additional cents, mass transit another half of a 
penny. The balance will be used for deficit reduction. 
Not only is the trust fund growing, but also most of the huge sums that have 
been spent on interstate highways for the last 35 years can be applied now to 
other transportation projects, since only about 300 miles of the 42,800-mile 
interstate system remain to be built. 
Moreover, the trust fund now has a surplus of about $19 billion. As the fund 
grows, so have conflicts over how to spend it. With the development of 
interstates, suburbs have sprouted and sprawled, creating demands for new 
transportation networks. Many highways and bridges are in desperate need of 
repair, but new modes of public transportation are essential to cutting 
pollution and congestion. 
Passage of the last highway/mass transit measure, in 1987, set off a raucous 
veto fight with then-President Ronald Reagan. He assailed 120 "pork barrel" 
road projects listed in the bill as well as $667 million earmarked for the Los 
Angeles Metro Rail system. 
Congress overrode the veto, forcing the $88-billion measure into law. 
ISSUES: The debate on new legislation likely will center on the push by Roe and 
others for more mass transit money. 
"In urban centers, more highways alone are not the total answer. We're kidding 
ourselves if we don't move people with some flexibility," Roe said. 
But Jack Martin, a spokesman for the Highway Users Federation, said mass 
transit "already has plenty" of federal money, "especially in view of all the 
highway infrastructure needs that are not being met around the country." 
Closely related to this controversy will be President Bush's proposal to build 
new arterial roads dubbed "highways of national significance." Many would link 
interstates in areas of high population growth. 
The Administration also is expected to spur controversy with plans to switch 
funding of some mass transit projects from the Highway Trust Fund to general 
revenues, which would force transit systems to compete for funds with 
non-transportation programs. 
OUTLOOK: A Bush veto is likely if Congress tries to spend more than the $14.5 
billion a year now going for highways and mass transit. Congress may attempt 
just that, especially in the event of a deep recession. Many lawmakers think 
creating public works jobs can spur economic recovery. 
