JALISCO NATIVE HELPING OTHER IMMIGRANTS; 
CLUB: ORGANIZATION AIMS TO IMPROVE LIVES THROUGH BUSINESS LOANS AND EDUCATION. 
A South Gate businessman is spearheading a drive to provide help for an 
estimated 5,000 residents from Mexico's state of Jalisco, many of them poor and 
uneducated, who have immigrated to this city in recent years. 
Ruben Arenas founded the Federacion de Clubes Jaliscienses to seek out adult 
education programs and business loans for Jalisco natives and other Latinos. At 
least 30% of the 4.5-million Mexican immigrants who live in Los Angeles County 
come from Jalisco, according to estimates by officials at the Mexican consulate 
in Los Angeles. 
Arenas, a Jalisco native, said he formed the club to provide opportunities for 
those who left the state. He also wants to change the image of Latinos as 
uneducated and not united. 
For Latinos to advance, they must first have an education, Arenas said. Some of 
the club's 200 members quit school after the third grade in Mexico and work on 
assembly lines and in service industries here. Only a few are small-business 
people, he said. 
The majority came here poor and uneducated, Arenas said. In contrast, Arenas 
arrived with a college degree in architecture and the benefits of a 
middle-class background. Today he owns several businesses in the Southeast 
area, including a real estate company, a travel agency and an import-export 
business. 
Arenas said the organization he founded is a place for South Gate Latinos to 
congregate and learn about the services available to them. The city cannot meet 
all the needs of the sizable Latino community, which accounts for more than 73% 
of its population of 82,000. "It is another way to help the city and our people 
from Mexico," Arenas said. 
Juan Jose Gutierrez, the club's education director, agreed. "The idea is that 
clubs by region should have more of a civic-oriented purpose that goes beyond 
the organizing of social parties and the crowning of regional queens. There are 
more essential needs, (such as) education," he said. 
Club officials direct members to state and federally funded adult education 
programs, which are usually offered through public schools, community 
organizations and community colleges. The long-term goal is for members to 
become literate in their native language as well as in English, and involved 
with vocational training, Gutierrez said. 
Much like other regional clubs, the organization also tries to maintain contact 
with the people of Jalisco. Recently some members drove a trailer of X-ray 
machines and beds to Jalisco and donated the equipment to a hospital there. 
State education officials confirm that Mexican immigrants in the last 20 years 
have tended to be from rural areas and have minimal education. Latinos, 
however, do not fare worse than other immigrant groups in educational level, 
said David Dolson, assistant manager of the bilingual office of the state 
Department of Education, adding that many immigrant groups come with little 
schooling. 
But club officials take little comfort in that knowledge. "Without education, 
Latinos are always going to be janitors and dishwashers, jobs where they don't 
need to speak the language," Gutierrez said. 
The club also works with other Latino organizations such as the Mexican Chamber 
of Commerce of Los Angeles, which specializes in helping small-business 
enterprises, and the Willie C. Velasquez Center, which provides amnesty classes 
and education for immigrants. 
