TRAVELING MUSEUM ALLOWS STUDENTS TO TOUCH THE PAST; 
EDUCATION: RAY GLAZNER TOURS SCHOOLS WITH HIS OWN MUSEUM. HE SAYS STUDENTS 
"REMEMBER WHAT THEY CAN TOUCH." 
Ray Glazner goes Back to the Past. And he does it with special effects, though 
not the stuff of Steven Spielberg. His props -- beaver skins, moccasins, 
bayonets -- are real-life replicas of another era in American history, when 
revolution had only begun to reach the colonial consciousness. 
He is his own museum -- he calls it "Images of the Past," and he takes his 
exhibits to San Fernando Valley-area schools and clubs. Bearded and burly, he 
looks the part of an early settler, primed to capture his prey in the 
wilderness and cook it on a campfire. 
But Glazner is actually a retired schoolteacher from New Jersey. 
"Over the years," said Glazner, 48, of Simi Valley, "I've collected enough 
stuff to do any period in American, or even world, history." 
By reading "lifeless" textbooks, Glazner believes, most students don't feel 
connected to the major themes and symbols of American history; they simply 
memorize dates and names. By displaying dozens of artifacts from pre- and 
post-Revolutionary War days, Glazner hopes to make a more lasting impression. 
"Ask them what they read in a history book and they wouldn't be able to tell 
you," Glazner said, "but ask them the details of a movie they saw and they can 
tell you everything. They remember what they can touch." 
They touch everything. During a recent presentation at Fairfield School in Van 
Nuys, third-graders were fascinated with Glazner's artifacts, asking dozens of 
questions. On this day, he dressed up as a pre-Revolutionary War merchant, 
wearing breeches, a waistcoat and black boots. When he finished explaining the 
historical significance of the items, about 50 in all, the students filed up to 
the rectangular table and played with the past. 
"You don't find things like this around now," said Danielle Judis, 8. "I like 
learning about what happened in the old days." 
Glazner experienced the same curiosity when he attended elementary school in 
New Jersey in the early 1950s. He had a teacher who has served as his role 
model. 
"He had just returned from Korea," Glazner said, "and he would bring in things 
from the war. He made it so easy to hear and see things. I decided right then 
that this would be how I was going to teach." 
Glazner benefited from growing up in a well-to-do family with a passion for 
collecting antiques. Each weekend, his family spent hours at antique shops. His 
parents would check on glass and furniture, but Glazner headed straight for the 
military items. 
"A gun was more exciting than a piece of glass," he recalled. "We used to hunt 
all the time, and so guns meant a lot to us." 
Since then, Glazner has gradually collected pieces of American history wherever 
he could obtain them -- swap meets, antique shops, museums, organized 
historical festivals. Some he keeps for himself, and others he uses in his 
presentations. He's not afraid to make expensive purchases, such as the $1,500 
he spent on a 1783 Pennsylvania rifle, considering them valuable long-term 
investments. He receives $200 a day from schools, although he says at his 
current pace -- about one class a week -- he will only net about $10,000 this 
academic year. 
After 25 years as an elementary and junior high school teacher in Bloomsburg, 
N.J., Glazner headed west to California after his wife, Linda, became chairman 
of the occupational health department at UCLA. He began "Images of the Past" in 
June, 1988. He considered returning to full-time teaching, but resented the 
state of California's requirement that teachers must pass math aptitude tests. 
"I'll be damned if I have to take a class in geometry and trigonometry," 
Glazner said, "when it's stuff I'm not going to use." 
Instead, he's aiming for a schedule that would take him to about 100 to 150 
schools per year. He says once he's visited a school, "they always ask me 
back," but the hard part is getting there in the first place. On days he's not 
giving his presentation, Glazner is contacting schools, mailing brochures or 
searching for more artifacts. History, he asserts, isn't given its proper 
respect in the schools. 
"Kids don't even know how to visit a museum," Glazner said. "They get bored 
really quickly. The objects are behind glass, and so they can't touch them. All 
they see are these cards that explain what the objects are, which is just more 
reading for them. They get enough of that at school." 
Even when there might be interest, Glazner understands the inherent limitations 
of school districts. "Not every teacher interested in artifacts can afford 
them, and the schools can't pay for them, either." 
Glazner has a simple answer. 
"Me." 
