CULINARY SOS: PEACHES MELBA FOR HOLIDAY PARTIES 
DEAR SOS: Could you print a recipe for peach Melba. I had a recipe once, but it 
has disappeared from my files. 
 -- FAY 
DEAR FAY: It's always a pleasure to resurrect classical old recipes, especially 
for holiday entertaining. Peaches Melba, named after Nellie Melba, an 
Australian diva during the turn of the century, whose voice inspired a chef to 
create the dessert of ice cream and peaches, makes a wonderfully simple yet 
elegant dessert for any dinner party. 
PEACHES MELBA 
1 (1-pound, 13-ounce) can peach halves 
1 teaspoon vanilla 
1/8 teaspoon ground nutmeg 
1 cup raspberry jam 
1/4 cup Port 
1 quart vanilla ice cream 
Toasted slivered almonds 
Turn peaches in bowl and stir in vanilla and nutmeg. Let stand at room 
temperature 20 minutes to blend flavors, then chill thoroughly. 
Beat together jam and Port until smooth. Drain peach halves and place cup side 
up in individual dessert dishes. Place scoop of ice cream in each peach half. 
Top with raspberry sauce and sprinkle with almonds. Makes 6 to 7 servings. 
DEAR SOS: I had clipped, saved and used the Rancho Bernardo Inn's Walnut Bread 
recipe numerous times, and suddenly, when I looked for it again, it was gone. 
I've exhausted the usual hiding places so now I am appealing to you. (Do these 
ragged clippings perhaps sneak away to a rest home for worn out recipes?) 
 -- MARGE 
DEAR MARGE: They certainly do. We have files filled with these missing recipes, 
so we are happy to report that Rancho Bernardo Inn's Walnut Bread was not among 
the missing -- or retired. 
RANCHO BERNARDO INN'S WALNUT BREAD 
1 cup butter or margarine 
2 cups sugar 
4 eggs 
4 cups flour 
1/2 teaspoon salt 
2 teaspoons baking soda 
1 1/2 cups chopped walnuts 
2 teaspoons vanilla 
2 cups sour cream 
Cream butter and sugar until fully blended. Slowly beat in eggs. Sift flour, 
salt and baking soda and add to egg mixture. Blend in nuts, vanilla and sour 
cream. 
Turn batter into well-greased 9x5-inch loaf pan. Bake at 350 degrees 65 minutes 
or until wood pick inserted in center comes out clean. Cool 10 minutes. Remove 
from pan. Makes 1 loaf. 
