'DINOBUSTERS' USE HIGH-TECH TO FIND GIANT CRITTER'S BONES 
New technology that should move the tedious search for dinosaur skeletons 
beyond the age of the pick and shovel is helping scientists recover the longest 
dinosaur ever discovered. 
By using sonic images of the sandstone beneath a site in New Mexico, scientists 
were able to detect the dark shadows of bones of "seismosaurus" -- so named 
because it was so big that when it walked the ground must have trembled. 
Results of the project were presented here Thursday during the fall meeting of 
the American Geophysical Union. 
The early digging consisted of hit-or-miss, time-consuming excavations, but 
today about 50 workers know precisely where to dig because of a technology 
developed by the federal Department of Energy to help locate acceptable burial 
sites for waste disposal. Much of the skeleton has already been excavated but 
it will take about two years to finish the project. 
The process is similar to computer tomography, which uses X-rays to produce 
images of tissues and bones inside humans, except in this case sound waves are 
used instead. 
"We call ourselves the 'dinobusters,' " said geophysicist Alan Witten of Oak 
Ridge National Laboratory. Mimicking the theme from the movie Ghostbusters, he 
added: "Something big in your neighborhood? Who ya gonna call?" 
"Seismosaurus" is one of the largest critters ever found, measuring 110 feet in 
length, according to Peggy Bechtel of the Southwest Paleontology Foundation 
Inc., Albuquerque, coordinator of the excavation. 
The strange beast, which is mostly tail and neck extending from a 
disproportionately small body, was buried almost intact along a river bank 
northwest of Albuquerque about 150 million years ago. The exact location is in 
a federal wilderness area, and it has not been revealed in an effort to 
discourage uninvited guests who might vandalize the site. 
Most dinosaur skeletons are spread over huge areas by erosion and predators, 
but sonic images of "seismosaurus" reveal that it was buried in a fetal 
position that it probably assumed at the time of death. 
One reason the bones were not carried off by other animals lies in their great 
size. One chunk from the animal's vertebra weighs about 3,300 pounds, which was 
more than the entire weight of the largest other animal known to inhabit that 
region at that time, said Wilson Bechtel, who is helping to coordinate the 
excavation. 
Once the great beast is fully unearthed, it will be reassembled at the New 
Mexico Museum of Natural History in Albuquerque and put on public display. 
Shotgun on Wheels 
The excavation has been accelerated considerably by the technique developed by 
Oak Ridge's Witten and Jozef Sypniewski of Wayne State University. 
The heart of the process is an 8-gauge shotgun on wheels, which Witten called a 
"cannon." 
"It fires a slug of soft metal into the ground," Witten said. "It hits the 
ground and flattens," sending out sound waves. 
An array of 29 microphones lowered down a well on the other side of the site 
picks up the sound waves, which are affected by the different materials they 
pass through. The cannon is then moved two feet away and the process repeated. 
By plotting the time at which the sound waves are received, Witten is able to 
show precisely where the bones are hidden beneath the eight-foot-deep layer of 
sandstone that has built up over the last 150 million years. 
The system works, he said, because sound waves travel 12,000 feet per second 
through the bones, but only 1,500 feet per second through the surrounding 
sandstone. The difference in arrival time casts a "sound shadow" that can be 
used to create an image of the skeleton. 
"This animal has been unique," Witten said, "because usually only one or two 
bones are found, but here we have one bone after another." 
The images tell workers precisely where the bones are located, including some 
that broke away from the main skeleton and either slid down a sand dune or were 
washed a few feet away. 
The technology was developed by the Energy Department to help find sites that 
are suitable for waste disposal and to find past sites that may harbor 
hazardous materials. It cost about half a million dollars to develop the 
technology, Witten said, but paleontologists should be able to build their own 
systems for about $20,000, he said. 
