LOCAL HEROES: THEY'RE CLOSE TO HOME -- AND THEY CARE; 
IL FORNO AND CAFE JACOULET ARE PART OF THE NEIGHBORHOOD 
The world is populated by three kinds of restaurants. 
In Los Angeles, the most important is the hot new restaurant -- the one that 
just opened, the one that everybody talks about, the one that nobody can get 
into. Hot new restaurants, however, don't last; sooner or later they either die 
or turn into one of the other varieties. 
Some become occasion places -- the restaurants you go to on your anniversary, 
on your birthday or when your boss is taking you for an expense account 
blow-out. These are the restaurants that invariably crop up on those lists of 
the best places in town. Owning such a restaurant is good for the ego. It can, 
however, be hard on the pocketbook, and most restaurateurs will tell you that 
all they really want is a restaurant of the third kind: the beloved 
neighborhood joint. 
This is the kind of place that people go to again and again, the place that 
they think of as a home away from home. This is a restaurant where the waiters 
know you, you know the menu, and the chef knows your tastes. 
Some beloved restaurants become famous; Spago and Chasen's are, after all, 
nothing more than neighborhood restaurants for stars. Most beloved restaurants, 
however, have a different clientele. They are frequented by ordinary people who 
live nearby and like the way the restaurant makes them feel. Each of these 
restaurants is a reflection of its neighborhood, and most go on for years 
making many people very happy. Recently I ate at two such restaurants. 
"I knew I was a regular when the free pizza finally appeared on the table," 
said the friend who took me to Il Forno. One of the dozens of people whose 
devotion to the place knows no bounds, he's a regular who has been touting the 
place to me for quite some time. Judging by the numbers of free pizzas on the 
tables, he is not alone. 
But how can you tell which pizzas are free? "It's easy," confides my friend, 
"This one's not on the menu. It's called pizza Ken, and you can't order it. See 
-- it has no cheese." Pizza Ken is a light, crisp crust topped with a fine 
plain tomato sauce and a few shiitake mushrooms. I can see how it could easily 
become addictive; I'm already wondering how I am going to get one the next time 
I come in. How long before you become a regular? 
Probably a long time; it looks as if this small, clamorous restaurant is not in 
need of new customers. Most of the people who walk through the door seem to 
know one other. Kids hop from table to table, plates are passed around, there 
are a lot of waves and hugs. You are warmed by the atmosphere, and it feels 
very good to be here -- at least once you get used to the decibel level. 
The people who own Il Forno have done a very smart thing; they have created a 
trattoria for Los Angeles. It doesn't look like an Italian trattoria: It's a 
spare room in a shopping mall with an open kitchen and too many tables squeezed 
into too small a space. It doesn't taste like a trattoria in Italy either: The 
food is pure L.A.-Italian, a mixture of very good pizzas, good salads, eclectic 
pastas with an American amount of sauce (too much), and entrees that are 
characterized by their robust flavors and generous size. But it feels like a 
trattoria: unpretentious, neighborly, overwhelmingly comfortable. 
The pizzas are memorable. I barely manage to prevent myself from ordering 
another. Instead we have a seafood salad made of baby shrimp, octopus, Calamata 
olives and squid tossed in a lemony dressing. If the squid were cooked a few 
seconds less, the salad would be even better. Pastas are served in enormous 
portions. They are so good that before I realize what I have done I have 
finished off a plateful of what look like torn ruffly edges of lasagna noodles 
in a lamb-based sauce. 
My friend insists on ordering tonight's special pasta as well. "The owner says 
it's great," he says. It didn't sound great to me; it sounded as if it 
contained far too many ingredients. When the waiter was explaining it I got as 
far as chicken breasts, pine nuts, radicchio, sun-dried tomatoes, shiitake . . 
. and then lost track. We taste the dish, and sure enough, too many 
ingredients. It pains my friend to admit that the owner was wrong. 
"But try this," he says, tucking into an enormous, and slightly tough veal chop 
topped with a mountain of shiitake mushrooms. "Isn't it great? We don't usually 
order entrees," he admits, "usually we just have salad and pizza and pasta and 
get out the door for about $40 for two of us." He looks over at my plate, 
spears one of my Hawaiian prawns in white-wine and garlic sauce (very big and 
very good) and mentions that we really shouldn't miss the tirami su. 
Of course Il Forno has tirami su. It is, after all, on the Westside where every 
hip restaurant is noisy and no hip restaurant is without tirami su. 
It's good tirami su. But personally I'd rather have another pizza. 
 Il Forno, 2901 Ocean Park Boulevard, Santa Monica. (213) 450-1241. Dinner for 
two, $30-$60. 
 Il Forno is the almost-perfect Westside restaurant -- friendly and trendy all 
at the same time. Cafe Jacoulet is something else. It did not, after all, get 
to be the most beloved restaurant in Pasadena by catering to Westside tastes. 
Once you get past the retail store at the entrance, with its case filled with 
food-to-go and its racks filled with wine, you find yourself in a grown-up 
restaurant: It is a place where you wouldn't feel uncomfortable wearing a suit 
and where you wouldn't find it difficult to have a conversation -- even without 
raising your voice. 
"Hello Bob, Hello Mrs. Davis," says the maitre d', leading people to their 
tables. Is there anybody he doesn't know? It hardly seems so. Once again this 
is a friendly place where almost everybody seems like a regular. But, unlike Il 
Forno, this is a decorated and decorous room. The people sitting beneath those 
pretty Japanese prints don't table hop; they simply sit in their seats and wave 
discretely at one another. 
When Cafe Jacoulet first opened, California cuisine was so rare that it was 
almost instantly dubbed "a poor man's Michael's." Now that California cuisine 
is ubiquitous, it's hard to see the connection: This food seems closer to the 
Franco-Japanese food served in restaurants such as Chaya Brasserie than that of 
your typical California grill. 
The menu is written daily, but there are dishes that I remember from the first 
time that I ate here, more than five years ago. Pasadena, unlike many other 
parts of town, has a sense of history. 
Consider this "wan tan de thon cru a la moutarde." Haven't I seen it somewhere 
before? As soon as it is set before me I remember; it was one of the signature 
dishes at the late La Petite Chaya. Won ton skins are deep-fried and layered 
with raw tuna and sliced avocado; there's a mustard dressing over the whole. 
It's a pretty dish -- but one that could use some of the ponzu sauce that is 
served on the chilled Oregon oysters. The oysters, I might point out, are 
wonderful -- and I can't think of another restaurant where you would get so 
many for $6.75. 
I like the asparagus served with shrimp and saffron sauce; it's one of those 
old-fashioned sort of dishes that you don't see much anymore. I can't say the 
same for the shiitake stuffed with lobster mousse. The mushrooms are battered 
like tempura then deep-fried and served with a Balsamic vinaigrette. It sounds 
unusual and intriguing, but the hot vinegar is so potent that it makes my eyes 
water. I find it hard to eat the dish. 
It is the only frightening food I've been served at Cafe Jacoulet: This is, 
after all, a restaurant where you can still sit down to dinner and have nothing 
more than a green salad and a bowl of onion soup without the waiter so much as 
cracking a frown. Tonight we are offered slices of duck breast in an 
almost-anachronistic raspberry sauce. Filet mignon served in shallot sauce, 
medallions of veal with mushrooms. The most outre of the entrees is the likable 
salmon in red wine sauce -- and even that is hardly new-fangled. 
Do we like our dinner? The maitre d' would like to know. We sip our coffee, eat 
our lovely lemon tarts and tell him we do. But what we like even more is that, 
this once, we really believe that he cares. 
 Cafe Jacoulet, 91 N. Raymond Avenue, Pasadena. (818) 796-2233. Open for lunch 
Tuesday through Saturday, dinner Tuesday through Sunday, brunch Sunday. Dinner 
for two, food only, $40-$75. 
