PEOPLE'S PHARMACY: NO MIRACLE DRUG, BUT CLOZARIL MAY HELP SCHIZOPHRENIC SON 
Question: My 23-year-old son suffers from schizophrenia. After living on the 
streets like a bum, he finally agreed to move into a residential treatment 
center. They have him on Haldol, but he is often restless and confused and 
frequently complains of blurred vision. 
We've read about a new medication for schizophrenia called Clozaril. It's very 
expensive, but we would be willing to make the sacrifice if it were a 
breakthrough against this awful disease. Is this drug worth the price? 
Answer: Clozaril (clozapine) has been available in Europe for almost 20 years 
but has recently been approved in the United States. It is unlikely to cause 
the uncontrollable muscle twitching (tardive dyskinesia) often brought on by 
traditional schizophrenia medications. 
This new drug is no miracle breakthrough. It can help some schizophrenics who 
have not responded well to other medicine, but it may cause drowsiness, 
drooling, constipation, blood pressure problems or seizures. 
Of far greater concern is a potentially life-threatening blood disorder that 
occurs in one or two patients out of 100. For this reason the company requires 
weekly blood tests, and the combination of medicine and monitoring can bring 
the price to almost $9,000 per year. 
The price may drop if a new testing program is developed. This may make the 
medicine affordable, but your son's doctor is the best judge of whether he 
could benefit from Clozaril. 
Q. I read your article on bedwetting and a medicine that has been developed for 
children. I myself am a bedwetter of 33 years. This has caused me to shy away 
from sleeping over, having others to sleep over, or enjoying any kind of 
intimate relationship. 
I am afraid to go to a doctor with this problem because of shame. Is there any 
hope at all for an old lady like me? 
A. You bet, but you need to screw up your courage and see a physician. We 
promise that a urologist will not be surprised to hear about your problem and 
will treat you with sensitivity. 
The doctor will determine the cause of your difficulty. Minor surgery may be 
the best approach, or the new drug you read about might turn your life around. 
DDAVP (desmopressin) works for adults as well as children. The nasal spray can 
effectively control nighttime urine production. 
