HOW TO BAKE FOR A VERY SMALL CROWD; 
DESSERTS: THERE'S NO NEED TO PREPARE A MOUNTAIN OF COOKIES THIS CHRISTMAS; 
PAIRED WITH ICE CREAM, THESE QUICK-FIX COOKIES ARE A PERFECT DESSERT FOR TWO. 
The aroma of freshly baked cookies is just as delightful a part of the holiday 
season as the scent of pine boughs. But even if you don't have a large family 
to bake for, you don't have to miss out -- this column has recipes for cookies 
and ice cream for two. 
The cookies, which supposedly originated years ago in Chicago's Senn High 
School (but more likely were part of the Board of Education's basic recipe 
book), are prized by practically everyone who went through that city's school 
system. The delicious, tender butter cookies with a light sugar coating may be 
the only thing some Chicagoans remember about their high school years. 
Fortunately, the recipe was easy to scale down. Like most cookie recipes, this 
one is easy to double in case the enticing fragrance brings a crowd to your 
door. 
For a special dessert, serve them with rich homemade Cinnamon-Ginger Ice Cream. 
SENN HIGH SCHOOL 
BUTTER COOKIES 
1/2 cup butter, softened 
Sugar 
Dash salt 
Scant 1 cup flour 
1/2 teaspoon vanilla 
Cream together butter and 6 tablespoons sugar until fluffy. Add salt. Gradually 
add flour, blending in to make stiff, smooth dough. Stir in vanilla. 
Form dough into 8 balls and place far apart on ungreased baking sheet. Place 
some sugar on saucer. Press palm of hand into sugar, then use to flatten each 
ball of dough to 3-inch circle, 1/4-inch thick. 
Bake at 350 degrees 12 to 15 minutes or until lightly browned. Leave on baking 
sheet 5 minutes, then loosen with spatula and remove to wire rack to cool 
completely. Makes 8 cookies. 
CINNAMON-GINGER 
ICE CREAM 
1 pint half and half 
3 egg yolks 
2/3 cup sugar 
Dash salt 
1/4 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
1/4 cup diced candied ginger 
Scald half and half and set aside. 
Mix together egg yolks, sugar, salt and cinnamon in top of double boiler and 
set over simmering water. Slowly pour in half and half, whisking constantly. 
Whisk over low heat until mixture is slightly thickened and smooth, about 10 
minutes. Remove from heat and cool completely. 
Process in ice cream machine according to manufacturer's directions, adding 
ginger when mixture is slushy. Makes about 2 1/2 cups. 
Note: If desired, add 1/4 cup chopped pecans and/or 1/4 cup golden raisins to 
ice cream mixture when adding ginger. 
