SURVEYING THE ROAD AHEAD; 
VENTURA BOULEVARD: THE CITY COUNCIL ON DEC. 18 WILL TAKE UP A PLAN TO CONTROL 
DEVELOPMENT ALONG THE VALLEY'S MAIN THOROUGHFARE. EVEN THE MERCHANTS CAN'T 
AGREE IF LESS IS MORE. 
Finding Ventura Boulevard is no problem. Drive south to the gridlock and there 
you are. 
Determining the future direction of the San Fernando Valley's main street and 
commercial anchor is another matter, one the Los Angeles City Council will 
tackle this month. 
The street has been changing for a decade, amid controversies that have frayed 
the nerves of politicians, builders, homeowner groups and merchants. Today, 
many stretches seem to consist of one fancy clothing store, hairstyling salon, 
nail parlor, cute little mini-mall and trendy restaurant after another. 
There are still hot dog stands amid the valet parking. A few days ago, 
red-vested attendants shuttled Jaguars in and out of the parking lot of a 
popular eatery called Mary's Lamb, while a few doors away, a white 
Mercedes-Benz pulled into the driveway of Arthur's Hideaway, an adults-only 
motel. But the trend is decidedly toward fancier retailing and bigger 
buildings. 
"Anything goes here, as long as it's quality," said Raspin Stuwart, publisher 
of On the Boulevard, a publication distributed in shops along the street. 
Maybe not forever. The City Council on Dec. 18 will take up a plan to control 
development along Ventura Boulevard's 17 miles. 
The plan was formulated largely by a group of developers, homeowners and 
community leaders. It has been the focus of bitter debate over whether it is 
fair to property owners. 
It would establish a limit of 8.6 million square feet of additional commercial 
development over the next 20 years along the boulevard in Studio City, Sherman 
Oaks, Encino, Tarzana and Woodland Hills. 
The debate promises to be warm. 
Developers say many aspects of the plan are too restrictive and would lessen 
their property values. Some homeowners have said it is not restrictive enough. 
They argue that the street is already congested by much of the existing 19 
million square feet of development -- specifically several high-rise office 
buildings and complexes that dwarf longstanding small businesses and nearby 
residential neighborhoods. 
Rip Rense, a free-lance writer who lives in Sherman Oaks, said he enjoyed 
late-night strolls on Ventura Boulevard 15 years ago. 
"There was a comfort in the isolation of it all," he said. "There was nothing 
open, no yogurt shops, no coffee shops." 
That obviously has changed, and not for the better, in his view. 
"I do like the new activity, seeing the night spots and all the color," Rense 
said. "But I seldom go out for walks anymore because along with all this life 
has come an abiding unfriendliness of spirit. In the summer, there is a 
never-ending parade of young Valley schoolchildren in their $50,000 
automobiles, screaming and salivating out the window." 
Motorists, mostly not screaming, make about 70,000 trips a day on Ventura 
Boulevard. Planners say that if there were no controls on growth, about 40 
million square feet of development and 150,000 more vehicle trips would be 
generated in 20 years, resulting in round-the-clock traffic jams. 
Highlights of the plan under study include restricting the height of most new 
buildings to two or three stories and requiring commercial property owners to 
pay for upgrading Ventura to accommodate the traffic that additional 
development will bring. The council could approve, reject or change the plan. 
Some observers do not expect a vote until early next year. 
Many homeowners and merchants say the length of the street west of Sepulveda 
Boulevard shows growth's worst aspect. That's the home of high-rises whose 
construction about 10 years ago spurred homeowners to try to prevent similar 
development. A temporary moratorium on development is in effect. 
"There is gross overdevelopment west of Sepulveda," said Los Angeles City 
Councilman Joel Wachs, who represents part of the Studio City portion of the 
boulevard. Politicians and homeowners blame previous city administrations for 
the poor planning. 
One couple who want to see the plan go forward are Dennis and Bunny Delluge, 
who run Diane &amp; Rudy &amp; Sons Fountain &amp; Statuary in Tarzana. The 
couple said passage of the plan would reduce their property values -- and they 
are all for it. 
The Delluges said a large developer is angling to take over the business to 
build a shopping center on the property, which is at Vanalden Avenue. 
"We don't want to see this beautiful setting destroyed," Bunny Delluge said as 
she walked among tree-shaded stone angels. "We want to keep this place just the 
way it is. It's been in the family since the 1950s." 
Gerald A. Silver, an outspoken Encino resident who thinks that the plan is too 
permissive, said his doctor put him on a strict diet because his blood pressure 
has gotten too high over his reaction to development on the boulevard. 
"It's a traffic nightmare, an example of unplanned growth and the caving in to 
developer-driven planning," said Silver, the slimmed-down but agitated head of 
Homeowners of Encino. 
His voice became more shrill as he continued: "Twenty years ago, the street was 
an ideal, community-oriented shopping strip. There was anything you wanted -- 
supermarkets, restaurants, music stores, seed and garden shops. You could drive 
up one side, park and do all your business, then park on the other side and do 
the rest of it. 
"Now I cuss and swear whenever I drive down the street. My blood pressure 
shoots up. We've lost almost all of our community shopping. Now it's just a 
developer gold rush to put in more buildings. The street is just one bank and 
copy store on top of the other." 
To some business people, the street is better than it's ever been and getting 
better all the time. 
"It's time to blow this boring Valley image out," said Lenny Flahm, 30, owner 
of Lenny Salon in Sherman Oaks. "This is the new Valley." He would like to see 
more glitz, trendier businesses and a lot more advertising for the boulevard. 
The new Valley charges Beverly Hills prices. Flahm says he charges about $30 to 
$45 for a haircut, and "the prices go up from there." Lee Willis, co-owner of 
the Jona boutique, said his store carries designer merchandise with a "Rodeo 
Drive-type" price tag: Moderate to expensive. 
Flahm said the business climate of the boulevard has yet to peak. "It's a great 
street because no matter what you want, you can find it here," he said. 
Developers regard Ventura Boulevard as prime real estate for large shopping 
centers, multiplex cinemas and office buildings. 
Owners of some stylish businesses have found Ventura Boulevard to be a gold 
mine, not unlike other affluent business districts of Los Angeles. 
Westsiders have been driving over to swank restaurants along the boulevard, 
including the Bistro Gardens, a $3-million restaurant that is the local 
offspring of a Westside spot. Dinner without wine averages $70 a person, lunch, 
$25. 
That establishment, near Coldwater Canyon Avenue and Ventura Boulevard, is the 
centerpiece of a $15-million shopping center built by developer Herbert M. 
Piken, who calls it an example of suburban elegance. Piken has built seven 
shopping centers on the boulevard. He is not surprised that the street supports 
an upscale restaurant. 
"There are actors and others from the studios who will come here," he said. 
"There's nothing like it in the entire Valley." 
Piken is a villain to homeowner groups. Opposition to his center at Coldwater 
dragged the project a year behind schedule and $2 million over budget. 
Piken said he does not understand the emotional reaction of the community 
toward development. 
"There are always people who try to keep things from happening," he said. "But 
I took rides down the boulevard near Studio City. The stores were not that 
pretty. Sure they served the needs of the people, but they just weren't that 
attractive. If someone comes in with a nice project and landscaping, it should 
be welcomed. A lot of the boulevard needs to be more organized, better arranged 
and better utilized." 
The boulevard isn't everyone's river of money. Some large businesses have their 
problems, and so do little ones. 
An attempt by developer Dennis Bass to turn the historic La Reina movie theater 
in Sherman Oaks into a two-story, Melrose Avenue-caliber shopping mall flopped. 
Despite being near busy Van Nuys Boulevard and popular Tower Records &amp; 
Video stores, the center went bankrupt in August. 
"We felt that the neighborhood would support that kind of upper class of 
business," said Bunny Dixon, property manager for Bass' development company. 
"We came in with a lot of the top names -- Pure Sweat, Mrs. Fields, New York 
Jock. 
"But Pure Sweat went bankrupt. New York Jock just walked out and abandoned the 
store. One day they just emptied everything out. Mrs. Fields' store is dying. 
They're doing a quarter of what they expected to do. Overall, we lost 10 
stores." 
What went wrong? Parking, Dixon said. 
"The street doesn't lend itself to people parking and spending time here," she 
said. "Our parking lot was in back. We had plenty of parking, but people just 
didn't bother to go around the block. We also had a lot of foot traffic, but 
those people didn't spend any money. They just browsed." 
On a smaller scale, Renee Spina, who owns Urban Art, a clothing and 
leather-airbrushing store in Studio City, said she is struggling to become 
known. 
"How do you get people's attention when there's just store after store after 
store?" asked Spina, 24, who was a hostess at a Woodland Hills hamburger 
restaurant before starting Urban Art in June. Some days, no customers come 
through her doors and Spina is alone with a hamster named Manhattan. 
"I really wanted to be on Melrose, but it was too much money," Spina said. "So 
I came to the Valley. I thought having a Ventura Boulevard address would be 
better for the business than being somewhere else in the Valley. But it's been 
a real struggle. There's no foot traffic, and people just pass by because there 
isn't anywhere to park." 
To attract customers, Spina puts eye-catching clothes in her front window. A 
T-shirt with a flaming skull and two guitars in the background is the 
centerpiece. 
She would like to move to a location with more pedestrian traffic, or into one 
of the new shopping centers. 
"But it's ridiculous," she said. "Every one of these developers wants to charge 
$4.25 a square foot for rent. A small business can't possibly survive. It blows 
my mind. I would like to move, but when I do, it's going to be off Ventura 
Boulevard." 
