CENSORING SCHOOLBOOKS 
Are our children on loan to us while in grades K-12? It seems that the state 
feels that it is the ultimate authority when our children's educational future 
is at stake. For as long as my son has been in public school, teachers and 
administrators have begged parents to become involved in the educational 
process. Well, in the Hacienda/La Puente School District, we did. We became 
involved against the system and automatically we were labeled "book-burning 
fundamentalists." Yet the group of parents who formed an efficient and 
successful organization was varied in religious affiliation and ethnicity. 
Educators claim that children are bored. The question is whether reading 
curriculum is to blame or that teaching methodology is suspect. If the 
curriculum was so terrible, then I would not hold a master's degree in English. 
Neither would others of my generation be the functioning professionals they are 
today if "Dick and Jane" had not lead to a thirst for more challenging material 
-- which was always provided. That leaves the educational process itself as the 
culprit. Only the self-motivated children do well in school today. Our 
educators have failed to motivate their charges. 
Parents must share the blame, though. How much easier it is to plop down a 
preschooler in front of a TV and have letters, numbers, and concepts dance and 
sing for them. 
The article also contains comments by the publisher. I would suggest that the 
argument is totally fallacious. It is true that many of the series books have 
excerpts from classic literature. But those selections are surrounded by 
material that is neither literature nor classic. In no way are the darker (to 
be mild) selections comparable to traditional fairy tales. The material 
contained is much closer to the contemporary horror genre, in which evil 
usually triumphs., 
Finally, the challenge is not to "stop this censorship wildfire," as Michael 
Hudson contends. The "censorship wildfire" is nonexistent. True, a few "wackos" 
are burning books. But an overwhelming majority of evangelicals would be as 
appalled as I at any such action. The challenge is to raise our children to 
function and thrive with intelligence and character in a rapidly changing 
global society. In this matter, the parents are the experts. 
GARY S. BLINN 
La Puente 
