SCIENCE / MEDICINE; 
FISHING AND POLLUTION POSE INCREASING THREAT TO DOLPHINS, PORPOISES; 
SEA LIFE: THE DANGER IS NOT AS DRAMATIC AS THE ONE FACED BY WHALES, SCIENTISTS 
SAY. BUT IT IS REAL NONETHELESS, AND HAS PUSHED SOME SPECIES TO THE BRINK OF 
EXTINCTION. 
Grass-roots and governmental efforts ended the wholesale slaughter of the 
Earth's great whales and saved some species from ignominious extinction for the 
sake of lamp oil, fertilizer and pet food. 
But scientists at a recent symposium here warned that the whales' compact 
cousins, porpoises and dolphins, continue to be killed in numbers at least as 
large as those racked up by the deadliest harpoon-wielding whalers of earlier 
times. 
Extinction, for some species at least, may be only a decade away. 
Scientists at the American Cetacean Society conference said some cetaceans -- 
the scientific order of whales, dolphins and porpoises -- are vanishing slowly 
because of people's growing appetite for fish and the rapid pollution of the 
seas. And while this scenario is less dramatic than death by harpoon, it 
nonetheless amounts to extermination, they contend. 
"In one sense, we have traded the harpoon for the sewage outfall and the 
fishing net," said Scott Kraus of the New England Aquarium in Boston, while 
describing the danger now facing cetaceans. 
"There is great reason to be concerned," said Robert Brownell of the U.S. Fish 
and Wildlife Service station in San Simeon, Calif. "For about half the cases 
where we have enough information to make a judgment (about the possible 
extinction of a species), things are going to hell in a hand basket." 
Bernd Wursig, a professor in the Marine Mammal Research Program at Texas 
A&amp;M University, said 28 species of small cetaceans are in "very real and 
immediate danger" of extinction, many by the end of the decade. 
Fishing is the most dangerous threat for several reasons, scientists postulated 
in two dozen papers presented over two days. One reason is that humans 
out-compete cetaceans for food, leaving too few squid, for example, in a 
traditional breeding ground to support a new generation of juveniles and their 
parents. 
Another is that fishing boats inadvertently snare and suffocate porpoises and 
dolphins in the huge nets used to sweep oceans clean of tuna and other 
commercial fishes. Pledges by American tuna boats and canners to abandon 
fishing methods that kill dolphins has not stopped foreign vessels from taking 
their place and feeding a growing taste for tuna in other countries, the 
scientists said. 
"The human predator has become an efficient and voracious competitor who 
threatens domination at all levels of the food web," warned Charles (Stormy) 
Mayo of the Center for Coastal Studies in Provincetown, Mass. 
A third impact of fishing is even more disturbing, scientists said. It is the 
increasingly common "targeting" of dolphins and porpoises -- netting them on 
purpose, as a source of relatively inexpensive protein in such impoverished 
countries as Peru and Sri Lanka. 
Tens of thousands are taken for food each year now -- a substantial increase in 
just a few years -- and the trend is growing. Several dolphin and porpoise 
species, such as the beautiful freshwater beiji in China's Yangtze River and 
the squat little vaquita in the northern Gulf of California, already are being 
pushed close to extinction, scientists warned. 
As the annual kill climbs -- and researchers said spotty statistics indicate 
that it already is well over 100,000 small cetaceans annually -- other species 
may follow them toward oblivion unless public pressure and the International 
Whaling Commission are brought to bear on the problem, scientists warned. 
Besides the beiji and vaquita, Brownell said that cetacean populations now 
facing serious problems are the striped dolphin in the Mediterranean Sea, the 
familiar bottlenose dolphin off South Africa and the harbor porpoise along the 
east and west coasts of the United States, including California. 
"Without immediate and significant intervention, we are going to see the loss 
of some species, and we are going to see it soon," Brownell told the other 
scientists and environmental activists who gathered for the conference. 
Such warnings overwhelmed small slivers of good news also presented at the 
conference, such as an encouraging report that gray whales, the species most 
often spotted by California whale-watchers, are growing in numbers. Brownell 
said that in the last three decades the worldwide catch of whales has fallen 
about 99%, to 669 last year. 
Coincidentally, however, incomplete and anecdotal data indicate that the 
worldwide slaughter of smaller cetaceans has grown dramatically as commercial 
fishing technologies have evolved and Third World economies have declined. 
High seas drift nets, miles-long webs strung across the open ocean to snare 
whatever is unlucky enough to encounter them, have been used for only about a 
decade, Brownell said. But their devastating impact on cetaceans, as well as 
many other species, already is being felt. 
Squid drift-net fishers in the Pacific, for example, reported inadvertently 
killing 19,000 members of one cetacean species last year alone, he said. Drift 
nets are promoted by economic-development agencies as a cheap and efficient way 
for poor countries to catch food for themselves. 
"There is now evidence that the dolphin population of the eastern tropical 
Pacific cannot continue to withstand this predation and continue to survive," 
Wursig said. 
Hundreds more are taken annually by foreign tuna-fishing fleets that snare 
spotted dolphins in order to catch the yellowfin tuna that inexplicably swim 
below them. Under public pressure, American tuna boats abandoned this practice, 
but foreign fleets have eagerly stepped in to succeed them. "Now Mexico has the 
largest fleets -- and the largest (dolphin) kills," Brownell said. 
Mexican fishermen -- as well as American farmers and city-dwellers -- also are 
in danger of wiping out the Gulf of California harbor porpoise, a stocky, 
silver, shovel-nosed cetacean also known as the vaquita, or little cow. 
The fate of the vaquita is a microcosm of the danger facing small cetaceans 
around the world, said Omar Vidal of the Monterrey Institute of Technology and 
Higher Studies in Mexico. He said vaquitas are imperiled by a combination of 
fishing, pollution and changing habitat. 
Vidal said fishermen inadvertently snare vaquitas while fishing for shark, 
shrimp or totoaba, another endangered species. Totoaba fishing is illegal, but 
the species is pursued anyway because an unscrupulous fisherman can cut off a 
totoaba's head and pass it off as a corvina, a popular sportfish. 
At the same time, vaquitas are being poisoned by DDT and other agricultural 
chemicals that leach into the Colorado River in the rainy season and are swept 
into the Gulf of California, he said. 
And when the rain is light, he added, drinking water demands by cities, 
irrigation and hydroelectric dams prevent any river water at all from reaching 
the gulf, radically changing the region's ecology by affecting salinity, food 
types and food availability. 
Vidal said he has documented 95 inadvertent deaths just in fishing nets since 
1985, and estimates there are 200 to 500 vaquitas left. The true death toll, he 
said, is probably closer to 30 or 40 a year, or 15% to 20% of the entire 
population. 
Without swift and intensive human intervention, he concluded, the vaquita "is 
in very serious danger of imminent extinction." 
Andrew Read of the University of Guelph in Ontario, Canada, said that such 
"incidental" kills are beginning to give way to higher, intentional catches of 
cetaceans for food, in wealthy Japan as well as such impoverished countries as 
Sri Lanka. 
In Peru, as in other nations with a growing taste for dolphin and porpoise, 
cetaceans originally were caught by accident in nets set for shark, bonito and 
other pelagic, or open-ocean, fish. Poverty forced some fishermen to eat their 
unintended catch, and its popularity grew. 
At $1 per kilo, or less than 50 cents a pound, the meat of dusky dolphins, 
Burmeister porpoises and other cetaceans is cheaper than beef and chicken in 
that South American country, Read said, and therefore has become "an important 
protein source for poor Peruvian families." 
Landings at one Peruvian port, Pucasana, were 2,300 dolphins last year, up 
sharply from 200 just four years earlier, Read said. Extrapolating those 
figures to the rest of the country, he estimated that Peru alone may be taking 
as many as 10,000 cetaceans annually for food. 
Compounding the problem, he said, is that most of the dolphins are caught in 
August and September, the prime calving season. Read said fishermen often sell 
the valuable adult females they catch and bring home their near-full-term 
fetuses to feed their own families. 
"It is unlikely the population can withstand this predation" for long, he 
added. 
Pollution is perhaps the most subtle threat to cetaceans of all sizes, but Mayo 
of the Center for Coastal Studies cautioned that sewage, oil spills and urban 
and agricultural runoff are "acting as a catalyst for rapid and unpredictable 
change" in the oceans. 
"Largely for avarice and ignorance, we treat the greatest ecosystem on Earth 
not as our garden but as our dumping ground," he said. "We do so on the archaic 
idea that if we cannot see our wastes on the surface, they are gone forever." 
Ramona Haebler, a research veterinary pathologist at the U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency station in Narragansett, R.I., said she is investigating the 
role pollution might have played in precipitating mass beaching of bottlenose 
dolphins along the U.S. coast between June, 1987, and May, 1988. 
Necropsies showed the proximate cause of death was "overwhelming intrusive 
infection" of apparently unrelated origin. But she thinks the infections may 
have spread so rapidly because the dolphins' immune systems were depressed by 
chemical contamination. She said the dolphins were tainted by polychlorinated 
biphenyls, or PCBs, at levels 350 times that in Great Lakes fish, which are 
very polluted. 
PCBs were used to insulate electrical equipment before PCB manufacture was 
banned; this suspected carcinogen now helps researchers to estimate total 
pollution in animals. Animal fat readily absorbs PCBs, and when they are found 
they indicate the presence of a predictable range of other industrial 
pollutants. 
With so many pressures simultaneously bearing on cetaceans, Mayo said that the 
only hope is for scientists and environmental advocates to make pollution, 
habitat alteration and the slaughter of small cetaceans as visceral a public 
issue as was the rapaciousness of whaling. 
ENDANGERED CETACEANS 
* Harbor porpoise face serious problems off the East and West Coast of U.S. 
* U.S. tuna boats and canneries have pledged to abandon fishing methods that 
kill dolphins. 
* California coastline-Gray whals sightings by whale watchers are growing in 
numbers. 
* Gulf of California-Squat little vaquita is close to extinction because of 
pollution and overfishing. 
* Peru-Fishermen catch dolphins and porpoises as a sources of relatively 
inexpensive protein. 
* Mediterranean sea-striped dolphins face serious problems. 
* South Africa-Bottlenose dolphins face serious problems. 
* Eastern Tropical Pacific-Drift nets, which are promoted by economic 
development agencies, are being used as a cheap and efficient way to catch food 
for themselves. 
* China Yangtze River-Freshwater beiji is being stressed close to extinction. 
* Japan-Intentionally catches cetaceans for food. 
High Seas Drift Nets 
* Used as mile-long webs of monofilament fibers strung across the open ocean to 
snare whatever is in the way. 
* Mostly used in Eastern Tropical Pacific and other foreign fleets. Abondoned 
by American tuna boats. 
* Large amount of fish can be caught which lowers the food intake for whales, 
porpoises and dolphins. 
* Used for about a decade with devastating impact on the fist population. 
