COMBAT IN PANAMA; 
U.S. INVESTIGATORS START UNCOVERING MILLIONS STASHED AWAY BY NORIEGA; 
DRUG MONEY: PANAMA STRONGMAN MAY HAVE FUNDS HIDDEN AROUND WORLD. AND IT MAY 
INCLUDE INVESTMENTS IN U.S. REAL ESTATE. 
U.S. forces in Panama have found personal records of deposed strongman Manuel 
A. Noriega that could help investigators find millions of dollars in illicit 
drug profits that he has stashed around the world, including possible 
investments in U.S. real estate, Justice Department officials said Friday. 
The Treasury Department has joined the effort by appealing to foreign 
governments under terms of U.S. treaty agreements to freeze any identifiable 
assets of Noriega's, the officials said. The treaties mandate such cooperation, 
even in nations with bank secrecy laws, if there is evidence that hidden funds 
resulted from criminal activities. 
David Runkel, a special assistant to Atty. Gen. Dick Thornburgh, said U.S. 
military authorities "have seized a sizable amount of records" belonging to 
Noriega in connection with their assault on the headquarters of the Panamanian 
Defense Forces, which he commanded. 
Although the headquarters building was leveled in the initial nighttime attack 
by U.S. forces early Wednesday, the records were seized from an office used by 
Noriega within the PDF compound that apparently was still intact, Runkel said. 
Noriega is under indictment in the United States on charges that he accepted 
millions of dollars in bribes to help members of Colombia's Medellin cartel 
launder drug profits in his nation and ship cocaine to ports in Florida. 
Runkel said documents obtained from Noriega's office also "might suggest that 
he looted from the public treasury." He declined to elaborate. 
The seized records, if they prove relevant, will be made available to federal 
prosecutors if Noriega is captured and brought to the United States to face 
drug-smuggling charges on which he and others were indicted in February, 1988, 
authorities said. 
A government attorney with experience in drug matters said he doubts Noriega 
would prevail in a U.S. court by arguing that the evidence against him was 
illegally seized in a military attack on his country. 
"Fourth Amendment protections against illegal search and seizure stop at the 
water's edge," the attorney said. "They generally do not apply outside the 
United States, especially when the defendant -- like Noriega -- is a foreign 
citizen." 
However, any future trial of Noriega could be complicated by the fact that he 
once served as a key informant for the CIA, the Drug Enforcement Agency and 
perhaps other intelligence agencies, according to the government lawyer and 
other sources. 
They said that Noriega could be expected to argue that his drug trafficking was 
condoned by U.S. intelligence agents in return for information on subjects of 
interest to the United States. 
The Justice Department, according to one official, was so concerned about 
Noriega's intelligence connections that a special meeting was called late last 
week by Mark M. Richards, a high official of the department's criminal 
division. Those attending included representatives of the FBI, DEA and Customs 
Service, as well as the U.S. attorneys from Miami and Tampa, Fla., where the 
indictments against him were returned. 
Richards concluded, however, that there is "sufficient evidence to make this a 
winnable case," an official said. 
If Noriega sought to compel production of embarrassing records showing his past 
ties to the U.S. intelligence community, a federal judge would be required to 
examine such records in private before deciding if they were relevant to the 
charges against the dictator. 
"They might well be judged to be irrelevant and Noriega would get nowhere," one 
attorney said. 
Miami attorney Neal R. Sonnett, one of Noriega's lawyers, confirmed that he 
would seek to obtain and introduce such documents. He said that Noriega's past 
connections to the U.S. government "are no secret" and that "some of those 
issues would be relevant to our defense." 
If a judge ruled in Noriega's favor and if Thornburgh determined that such 
material was too sensitive to produce at trial, the attorney general would have 
to risk dismissal of the case. That situation occurred for the first time last 
month in the Iran-Contra case, when a judge dismissed all charges against 
Joseph F. Fernandez, a former CIA station chief in Costa Rica. 
