HOT TOPICS: SOME OF THEIR BEST DIETS INCLUDE PASTA, DING DONGS 
Trying to get rid of those extra pounds gained over Thanksgiving to make room 
for those that surely will come along with Christmas, Hanukkah and New Year's 
feasting? 
Hot Topics wonders: "What diet has worked best for you?" 
"The best diet ever: Eat as much as you want, exercise it off and enjoy life." 
Megan Delgleize, 17, senior, Mater Dei 
"I went to Weight Watchers camp this summer. They put us on a schedule of 
exercises. The food was really good." 
Sarah Hoppes, 14, freshman, Connelly 
"Eat right and don't eat junk food." 
Christina McKay, 15, sophomore, Sonora 
"Don't mix starch-rich foods with protein-rich foods, no animal fat, eat lots 
of fiber and make exercise goals." 
Mark Kern, 15, junior, St. Michael's 
"A few small meals/snacks throughout the day -- as opposed to three large meals 
-- supplemented with lots of exercise." 
Amy Sims, 17, senior, Valencia 
"Vegetarian. No candy, junk food or chocolate, no fast food." 
Sandy Ward, 15, sophomore, Cypress 
"In my opinion the only diet that can help you to lose weight is determination, 
willpower and good nutrition." 
Lacey Martz, 15, sophomore, Los Alamitos 
"Chew gum and drink water for two days straight." 
Jeanine Alles, 15, sophomore, Woodbridge 
"Eating healthy foods like yogurt and celery -- no salt or candy." 
Ashley Cappel, 15, sophomore, Connelly 
"Keep busy and have nutrition in mind when eating." 
Zeus Givargis, 17, senior, St. Michael's 
"Being an avid tennis player, I have found out that the best diet is eating 
plenty of carbohydrates and lots of pasta." 
Adam Jarrett, 17, senior, Mater Dei 
"Joining the Valencia girls' basketball team will keep anyone healthy and in 
shape." 
Christine Hwang, 16, junior, Valencia 
"I just never eat at night." 
Irene Lee, 15, sophomore, Woodbridge 
"No sugars, no candy, no chocolate, no fast foods, no meats, just fish and some 
chicken and proteins, vegetables, carbohydrates, lots of water, and exercise 
four times a week." 
Alyson Perry, 17, senior, Cypress 
"Self-control and learning to say no." 
Rachel Abraham, 17, senior, Los Alamitos 
"None -- they all seem to fail. I give in too easily to food. I just can't seem 
to resist it. I guess I don't have any willpower." 
Lisa Kang, 17, senior, Connelly 
"Looking at obese people and using them as motivation not to get that way." 
Jo Marjauregui, 16, sophomore, St. Michael's 
"I don't eat candy." 
Tom Spinks, 15, sophomore, Sonora 
"Chocolate doughnuts, bacon, chocolate milk, chocolate chip cookies, Twinkies, 
Ding Dongs, etc." 
Ricky Ellis, 17, senior, Mater Dei 
"No greasy foods or salty foods, lots of pasta, run one mile a day and don't 
eat after 7 p.m." 
Michael Casey, 17, senior, Cypress 
"Just eat a salad for lunch and dinner and run five miles at night." 
Leorah Mintz, 15, sophomore, Woodbridge 
"I just don't eat, but then I end up pigging out." 
Danielle Serraro, 15, sophomore, Connelly 
"Regular exercise and water, eating small, nutritious meals, no starvation, no 
fast foods and no sweets." 
Vanessa Sanchez, 17, senior, Cypress 
"None. I have learned to accept my flab as it is and now love all of my 
cellulite." 
Michelle Cantrell, 17, senior, Los Alamitos 
"I exercise a lot by playing basketball and I try to eat healthy foods every 
day." 
Jennifer Yamada, 15, senior, Woodbridge 
"Do not shove food into your mouth like there is no tomorrow." 
Lisett Martinez, 16, freshman, Cypress 
"Participating in fun sports, you don't realize that you're dieting." 
Carlos Moreno, 13, freshman, St. Michael's 
"Seven large meals in about two hours. Pigging out during a movie. I'm gonna be 
fat and happy." 
Judy Hlavac, 16, junior, Valencia 
Next Week's Hot Topic: 
What do you just hate to hear? 
