NAVY TAKES STEPS TO ERASE FOOTPRINTS; 
NATURE: AN AMBITIOUS PROGRAM IS UNDER WAY TO RETURN MUCH OF SAN NICOLAS ISLAND 
TO ITS PRISTINE STATE AND PRESERVE ITS FRAGILE ECOLOGY. 
A tiny island fox, once a cherished pet of aboriginal Indians on San Nicolas 
Island, has emerged as a symbol of the Navy's effort to restore the desert 
island to its pristine state. 
It is one of many threatened creatures that the Navy wants to bring into 
balance with the 225 Navy personnel at the island's missile tracking station. 
About 65 miles southwest of Point Mugu, the island is also home to the 
threatened island night lizard and provides rare breeding grounds for the 
Western gull, the Brandt cormorant and protected sea lions and seals. 
With no natural predators to fear, the tame foxes spent years crowding around a 
slop trough behind the Navy's galley, waiting for table scraps. Ecologists 
stopped the daily feeding in the mid-1970s when they realized the handouts had 
swelled the fox population far beyond what the 3-by-9-mile island could 
support. 
Forced to return to a diet of insects, vegetation and bird eggs, hundreds of 
the red, furry foxes died of starvation. Only recently have their numbers 
returned to a high of about 800. 
The ecologists fear that the island fox, a unique subspecies of its mainland 
cousin, may face another threat introduced by mankind. Averaging only four 
pounds, the fox has disappeared from parts of the island inhabited by 
once-domestic cats that have reverted to the wild. 
"We have no documentation they kill foxes, but they are twice their size," said 
Ronald Dow, chief ecologist at the Point Mugu Naval Air Station who also is 
responsible for the island's environment. "A big fox is five pounds, and we 
have found cats that are 12 and 13 pounds. And the cats are totally 
carnivorous." 
For now, Dow hopes the fox can outsmart the feral cat, or at least outlive it. 
He and other Navy ecologists have decided to concentrate on other aspects of an 
ambitious program to return much of the island to its natural state and 
minimize the Navy's imprint on the island's fragile and unique ecology. 
In coming months, the Navy will close its landfill on the island. It will burn 
paper waste and recycle the rest of the trash produced, dispatching it aboard 
barges to the mainland. The Navy also has plans to engage the California 
Conservation Corps to sweep the island for miles of wire cable, abandoned 
building materials and other military refuse. 
Much of the rusting shrapnel and other hardware is left over from an earlier 
era when the Navy had other plans for the island and the Army used one end as 
an artillery range. "We've got a lot of stuff to clean up," said Lt. Cmdr. 
Steven Buske, commanding officer of the island naval station. 
In one of the most painstaking tasks planned by ecologists, Dow and his staff 
hope to eradicate every non-native plant from the island and stop new species 
from arriving or taking root. Principally, they want to protect rare plants, 
including four species found only on San Nicolas Island, from being choked out 
by more aggressive plants from the mainland. 
On a recent morning, senior ecologist Thomas W. Keeney uprooted a tumbleweed 
near the ramp for unloading barges from the mainland. "They come in on the 
tires of trucks and equipment," Keeney said, looking at the tumbleweed, also 
known as Russian thistle. "Once Russian thistle gets started in a windy area, 
it's all over." 
Keeney said he has proposed that trucks and equipment from the mainland be 
cleaned before being allowed on barges headed for the island. 
The ecologists have plans to fill in some deep gullies caused by runoff from 
the Navy's 10,000-foot runway and other projects. They also hope to stop 
erosion by replanting barren land overgrazed by herds of sheep in the late 19th 
and early 20th centuries. To hold the soil and propagate rare plants, they plan 
to collect the seeds of native flora, grow them in nurseries and reintroduce 
the seedlings in new patches. 
Although the island is already restricted to Navy personnel and invited guests, 
ecologists hope to add further restrictions on breeding grounds for 25,000 
California sea lions, 15,000 elephant seals and 1,000 harbor seals. Any human 
presence, they said, causes seals and sea lions to stampede for the water, 
abandoning -- if not trampling -- their pups during the winter pupping season. 
They also want to prevent the island's few visitors from disturbing the nests 
of the Brandt cormorant or the Western gull -- two birds known to abandon their 
young when startled. 
To some Navy employees, the ecologists' high-minded plans seem out of place for 
a Navy base that tests the latest and most deadly missiles. But support for 
their environmental work stretches to the top, with each commander at Point 
Mugu's Pacific Missile Test Center in recent years voicing heightened concern 
about the environment. 
Rear Adm. William E. Newman, ranking officer on the base, has emphasized his 
commitment to reinforce the Navy policy of good stewardship of its natural 
treasures. "Let it be known that those are my personal sea lions out there," 
Newman told base officials when he assumed command last month. 
That mandate also extends to conserving Indian relics on San Nicolas Island. 
The 16-member environmental staff includes a resident archeologist who has 
marked and catalogued 95% of the Indian sites on the island. 
"The earliest site we have out here is 6000 BC," archeologist Steven Schwartz 
said. "On the mainland we don't have any well-documented sites earlier than 
3000 BC." 
Compared to the mainland, the island has excellent research potential because 
its desert climate preserves artifacts, and it has no gophers or other 
burrowing animals to disturb buried relics, Schwartz said. 
Little is known about the Nicolenos, the tribe that kept foxes as pets when it 
inhabited the island. Despite the tribe's mystery, the plight of its last 
surviving member is well known. The woman, who was marooned alone there for 18 
years, provided the inspiration for the popular children's book "Island of the 
Blue Dolphins." 
More recently, San Nicolas was chosen as a new home for a colony of sea otters. 
Introduced to the island by the U.S. Department of Fish and Game, the otters 
were relocated as part of a program to preserve the species by establishing an 
independent colony. It is feared that the main otter population between Point 
Conception and Monterey could be wiped out in the event of an oil spill. 
