PANEL KEEPS LAS VEGAS-TO-ANAHEIM SUPER-SPEED TRAIN ON TRACK 
The bistate commission working to link Las Vegas and Anaheim with a super-speed 
train voted Saturday to proceed with plans to build the $4-billion project. 
The California-Nevada Super Speed Train Commission voted 16 to 1 to continue 
the project-planning process and to call for proposals to build the 300-m.p.h. 
futuristic train. 
Ontario, Calif. Mayor Howard Snider cast the only dissenting vote. 
Snider said he feared a super-speed train station near his city would add to 
traffic congestion and pollution in the Orange County area. 
He said his vote reflects the fact that his concerns have not been answered by 
the commission, its consultants and Transrapid -- a West German super-speed 
train developer. 
Transrapid appears to be the only company willing to privately build, finance 
and operate the magnetically levitated train, said the Ontario mayor. 
"We really have only one potential bidder," Snider said. "To go ahead with a 
mag-lev train with one bidder in there, I think they're going to be calling all 
the shots. I don't think it's right." 
However, Las Vegas City Councilman Arnie Adamsen, who chairs the commission, 
disagreed and said Transrapid will not dictate to the commission. "It's going 
to be a cooperative effort," Adamsen said. 
He said other companies interested in building the train can register with the 
commission between Jan. 3 and Jan. 24, the registration deadline commissioners 
set Saturday for companies planning to seek the train franchise. 
Adamsen said a French company, TGW, which has developed a conventional style 
train that carries passengers at speeds up to 170 m.p.h., has not dropped out 
of the running. 
However, the French company was not represented at Saturday's meeting. 
At its October meeting, the commission selected Anaheim, 27 miles from downtown 
Los Angeles, as the California terminus for the proposed train. The board also 
decided to ask the company eventually chosen to build the train to consider 
running a spur from Victorville to Palmdale. 
Los Angeles officials have pushed recently for a station in Palmdale because 
the city is building a reliever airport in the rapidly growing community 
located in the northern portion of the San Fernando Valley. 
The Anaheim station likely would be built near Anaheim Stadium. Orange County 
Supervisor Don R. Roth, a former Anaheim mayor, has suggested a 17.4-acre site 
next to the existing Amtrak station and behind the stadium for a high-speed 
train terminal. The site is now used by county flood-control officials and has 
a county maintenance and repair shop. 
When Anaheim was selected as the terminus in October, Roth predicted that the 
rail system would be "a big boost for our tourism industry, and more 
importantly . . . a financially sound system." 
A consultant hired to study possible routes has estimated that an Anaheim-Las 
Vegas line, also stopping in Ontario, would draw 6.5 million round-trip 
passengers annually. 
By contrast, a line between the northern San Fernando Valley and Las Vegas, 
stopping in Palmdale, would draw only 2.3 million passengers, the consultant 
said. 
The consultant also predicted that while the super train would create between 
24,000 and 53,000 jobs, up to 47% of them in Southern California, auto traffic 
on the streets near the Anaheim station would jump from 9,700 trips on most 
days up to 31,000 trips on "peak Sundays." 
However, that increase in pollution could be offset a commuters using the super 
train instead of their cars to travel between the cities. 
Las Vegas officials estimate that about 60% of the city's visitors come from 
Southern California. 
