AN ODYSSEY INTO THE GARDEN OF LEARNING; 
WORDS ON FIRE: ONE WOMAN'S JOURNEY INTO THE SACRED; BY VANESSA OCHS HARCOURT 
BRACE JOVANOVICH $28.95, 328 PP. 
What is more desirable than forbidden fruit? Allowed the taste of every tree 
but the tree of knowledge, Eve -- as the story goes -- could not resist the 
temptation to sample the forbidden fruit and, as the story continues, she and 
her partner-in-crime, Adam, were summarily thrown out of Paradise. 
Though thousands of years have passed, the modern-day Eve, if she happens to be 
an Orthodox Jew and especially if she resides in Israel, is still an outcast, 
for the sacred texts of the Torah are forbidden to her. Author Vanessa Ochs 
spent a year in Israel and wrote "Words on Fire" to document her frustrations 
and indignation at the meager opportunities available for women who want to 
study the Torah in the original and in depth, as their male counterparts have 
been doing for centuries. 
"A Jew's understanding of the nature of God," Ochs writes, "of how to fulfill 
God's will, of how to behave and worship, of the past and future history of the 
universe are all contained in the Torah." She quotes from the Ethics of the 
Fathers, which enjoins men to "delve into the Torah and ... to continue to 
delve into it for everything is in it. 
But if Jews are called the people of the book, they mean men of the book, not 
women, she insists. 
An ardent feminist and a literature teacher, Ochs wanted, like the character in 
Isaac Bashevis Singer's "Yentl," not to be a man, but to touch and taste, hear 
and smell the sacred text that Jews have preserved and protected, loved and 
honored since time immemorial. 
Her title, "Words on Fire," comes from a quote from Rabbi Eliezer ben Hyrcanus, 
who wrote at the turn of the 2nd Century: "The words of the Torah should be 
burnt rather than taught to women." 
For Jewish feminists, that is a call to battle. 
True, as Ochs points out, eight centuries later the great Torah scholar, 
Maimonides, elaborated upon this point and softened the interdiction, 
indicating that not all women's learning was forbidden -- certainly not oral 
Torah (the teaching and interpretations of the rabbis) -- only written Torah. 
In our own century, Rabbi Baruch Epstein has written: "Girls do not have 
intellectual ability and are therefore unable to make profound inquiries with a 
sharp mind and appreciate the depth of Torah. It is possible that by using 
their own minds, they will transgress the will of Torah." 
Ochs is outraged, as most modern women would be upon reading this. "The voices 
of these sages ... echo each other. They offend, humiliate and demean me," she 
writes. 
While her husband and children are busy with their studies in Israel, Ochs 
searches the history books for records of Orthodox Jewish women who ignored the 
prohibition and found ways to study the Torah and even become respected Torah 
scholars. There were so few, she discovers to her dismay, that they can be 
counted on one hand. 
So Ochs abandons the history books and begins a living search. She does indeed 
find some exceptional women who not only study from the sacred text but have 
launched study groups, seminars and schools to teach other women. 
Although the book begins slowly, unfolds gingerly, and at times suffers from a 
lack of momentum, as Ochs penetrates more deeply into the forbidden territories 
of learning her prose becomes more urgent, her voice more lyrical. 
In her personal odyssey to find these women, to learn the Torah from them, Ochs 
defines and refines her own identity as a woman, a Jew and a scholar. 
Must woman be exiled twice, first from the Garden of Eden and then from the 
garden of learning? One woman's journey into the sacred becomes every woman's 
search for equality and mastery. 
