U.S. INDUSTRY RESPONDING TO PRESSURE TO RID THE ATMOSPHERE OF CFCS 
General Motors is trying to stuff a bigger air conditioner into its cars, while 
American Telephone &amp; Telegraph is revising decades-old assembly-line 
practices. 
The changes come as industry, under pressure from government and 
environmentalists, seeks to eliminate the use of chlorofluorocarbons, the 
one-time wonder chemicals that have been destroying the Earth's ozone layer. 
But the task is more complicated than simply replacing an old chemical with a 
new one, government and industry experts say. 
"The transition is going to take time. . . . We're talking about retrofitting 
not one industry but several industries," says F.A. (Tony) Vogelsberg, 
environmental manager for the Freon Division at Du Pont, a major producer of 
CFCs. 
CFCs, discovered in 1928, help cool houses in the summer and keep them warm in 
the winter. They are used to make the foam cushions on couches, in pillows -- 
even in stuffed toys. 
Without them, refrigerators would not cool, and radios, televisions, stereos 
and home computers might not work as well. 
The Dark Side 
But CFCs also have a dark side: When they float 10 to 30 miles above the Earth 
to the stratosphere, their chlorine component eats away at the ozone shield 
that protects against the sun's cancer-causing ultraviolet rays. 
Industrial nations want to ban all CFC production within the next decade. But 
while half a dozen or more replacements are under study, they all have some 
drawbacks and no single substitute is expected to be found. 
"I don't think there's going to be a substitute that is going to be given an 
A+" on all areas of concern, said Eileen Claussen, director of atmospheric and 
indoor air programs at the federal Environmental Protection Agency. "We're 
going to have to make some trade-offs." 
The EPA is examining the array of substitutes, mainly a family of chemicals 
called HCFCs, to determine whether they are toxic or pose other health concerns 
and how significantly they harm the environment. The HCFCs also deplete ozone 
but much less severely. 
"We clearly do not want to blunder along and create a new health or 
environmental problem while solving the ones that we targeted," said Charles 
Elkins, whose EPA office is reviewing the potential toxicity of some CFC 
substitutes. 
Every year more than 2 billion pounds of CFCs are produced worldwide, a third 
of them in the United States. 
The United States banned used of the chemical in aerosol cans in 1978, four 
years after the first concerns about the ozone layer were raised. Still, the 
operation of more than $135 billion worth of equipment nationwide is dependent 
on CFCs. 
Industry turned to CFCs because they do not burn or corrode metal, pose no 
direct health hazards to workers, and hold heat and cold, making them ideal 
insulators. 
That was before their threat to the ozone layer was understood. 
Half of the ozone over Antarctica was destroyed during September and October of 
1987, causing a hole in the Earth's protective shield that closes and reappears 
with the seasons. Severe destruction of the ozone layer is believed to be 
occurring over the South Pole again this year, according to scientists. They 
say the conditions for ozone destruction are present over the Arctic, although 
no massive loss of ozone has been observed there. 
Firms Bite Bullet 
Several large corporations have announced plans to end their reliance on CFCs, 
some by the early 1990s. These include such giants as AT&amp;T, IBM, Boeing and 
General Electric. 
"We have used CFC solvents and cleaners for so long they're almost ingrained in 
the manufacturing process," says David Chittick, vice president for environment 
and safety at AT&amp;T. Nevertheless, AT&amp;T hopes to end all uses of CFCs by 
1994. 
The major auto makers are developing substitutes and are designing new 
air-conditioning units to accommodate the changeover, probably in the 
mid-1990s. 
But the new air conditioners will be less energy-efficient and require larger 
compressors, experts say. "We feel we can do it without any dramatic effects on 
the look or design of the car. It's going to be difficult though," says Toni 
Simonetti, a GM spokeswoman. 
Congress is considering legislation calling for the elimination of CFCs by the 
year 2000 and at least 20 states are reviewing proposals aimed at curbing CFC 
pollution. Vermont has banned the use of CFCs in auto air conditioners after 
1994. 
Du Pont has spent more than $100 million on research for CFC substitutes and 
estimates that it will spend as much as $1 billion to build production plants 
and to cover other costs during a 10-year transition period. ICI Americas, 
another major manufacturer, also has spent $100 million in CFC replacement 
research and recently announced plans to begin production of a substitute 
cooling agent by 1992 at a new Louisiana plant. 
Cutting the Demand 
But developing substitute chemicals will not be enough. 
As much as 30% of today's CFC demand will have to be eliminated by conservation 
and recycling, government and industry experts say. Major appliance 
manufacturers as well as auto makers recently have supplied their repair shops 
with equipment to capture CFCs rather than let the old coolant vent into the 
air. 
But EPA and industry officials acknowledge that routine venting of old CFCs is 
still widespread. 
Shifts to new manufacturing procedures or altogether new technology could 
account for a 30% reduction in CFC demand, especially in the electronics 
industry, the experts say. 
But some critics say that industry is slow to accept new technology. "What 
we're facing is inertia," says Marc Goldberg of Crynodynamics, a New 
Jersey-based company that is producing a refrigeration system using helium as a 
cooling agent. The system is being marketed primarily for commercial uses. The 
major auto makers have expressed little interest. 
Companies such as AT&amp;T and Northern Telecom are turning to new 
manufacturing procedures such as using low-solids fluxes to reduce leftover 
residues and eliminate the need for CFCs as a solvent for cleaning circuit 
boards after soldering. 
"This (CFC problem) has caused a whole new review of the way we do business," 
says A.D. Fitzgerald, director of environmental affairs at Northern Telecom, a 
Canadian-based manufacturer of telephone equipment. 
The thorniest problems have emerged in the area of refrigeration and air 
conditioning because all substitutes under consideration pose energy and 
environmental trade-offs, particularly in the area of global warming. 
