GIRL FATALLY SHOT AS SHE WATCHES TV IN HER HOME; 
VIOLENCE: TANYA CADLE, 13, DIES HOURS AFTER HER PARENTS HAVE HER DISCONNECTED 
FROM LIFE SUPPORT. POLICE CALL THE INCIDENT AN APPARENT DRIVE-BY SHOOTING. 
A 13-year-old girl was fatally shot through her family's South Los Angeles 
living room window early Saturday as she watched television, a special occasion 
in which her normally strict mother had allowed her to stay up late because a 
friend was spending the night. 
Tanya Cadle was rendered brain dead by a single shot to her head and died hours 
later at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center after her parents had her disconnected 
from life-support systems, a hospital spokesman said. There were no other 
injuries. 
"I didn't hear the shots, I just heard my son shouting, 'Get down! Get down!' " 
said Tanya's mother, Eleanor Cadle, a devout Seventh-day Adventist. "Then we 
came out here and found (Tanya's girlfriend) on the floor and my daughter on 
the sofa." 
Los Angeles police described the crime in the 3000 block of South Hillcrest 
Drive as an apparent drive-by shooting. They had made no arrests Saturday. 
Eleanor Cadle, a security officer at USC, said that she and her husband, Dean, 
a chemical technician for a wheel manufacturer, had no idea what led to the 
shooting but that they resented early news reports implying that the crime was 
gang related. "No one here is affiliated with the gangs and we have nothing to 
retaliate about," she said firmly, as friends and fellow church members crowded 
her small home. 
The family, originally from Belize, moved to the quiet street of 
well-maintained bungalows about two months ago in the belief that it was a step 
up from their home on South Catalina Street. 
"I was looking for something better and it's better than where I was," Eleanor 
Cadle said. 
The incident was one of a number of shootings that took place over the weekend, 
including a 13-year-old who was shot to death in Pomona while he slept. 
At the Cadle home in the Crenshaw district of Los Angeles, grim family friends 
shook their heads in disbelief and anger as they took in the enormity of the 
violence. Bloodstains were visible on the brown sofa where Tanya had been 
watching television, across from a brightly lit Christmas tree. Lace and 
peach-colored curtains adorned the bullet-shatterred window and a well-thumbed 
Bible was on the coffee table. 
Tanya was a B student at Forshay Junior High School and had just returned from 
a church youth meeting when she asked to stay up late watching a video, her 
mother said. 
"They are a very nice family and they try to bring their kids up as best they 
can," said Clarine Davis, a friend. "It's a respectable family -- that's why it 
hurt so much when they said it was related to gangs. 
"We don't understand. We're just baffled. We try to do things with our kids to 
keep them off the streets; we're family people. You get to the point where you 
feel like you're doing the best you can, and then the kids aren't even safe 
when they are home." 
In other weekend violence: 
* A 13-year-old boy was fatally shot as he slept on a sofa in his grandmother's 
house in Pomona. Adrian Ferrusca of Claremont was killed about 1:30 a.m. 
Saturday when three suspects entered and left through the kitchen door, Pomona 
Police Officer Megan Blehr said. 
Although police said the victim was not a gang member, they described the 
shooting as retaliation for the deeds of relatives, calling the home a "known 
gang location." The family could not be reached for comment. No arrests have 
been made. 
* A 45-year-old candy vendor was found shot to death in his van in the 1500 
block of West 84th Place on Friday evening. Antonio Guerrero of Huntington Park 
was an apparent robbery victim, said Los Angeles Police Officer Roger Burton. 
No arrests have been made. 
* Five alleged gang members were wounded -- one critically -- when they 
ventured into hostile territory in east Valinda and were ambushed with an AK-47 
rifle, Los Angeles County sheriff's deputies said. The incident occurred about 
11 p.m. Friday near Gemini Street and Sandalwood Avenue in the San Gabriel 
Valley. 
Two suspects, ages 13 and 14, were being questioned Saturday afternoon but no 
charges had been filed, said Sheriff's Deputy George Ducoulombier. 
The victims were identified as Michelle Frondina, 18, of La Puente, listed in 
extremely critical condition at Queen of the Valley Hospital with wounds to her 
chest and back, and Edward Guerrero, 19, of La Puente, in serious but stable 
condition at County-USC Medical Center with multiple wounds to his upper torso. 
In stable condition were John Salazar, 18, of La Puente, at County-USC Medical 
Center; and two juveniles, ages 17 and 16, at Brea Community Hospital and 
Whittier Hospital Medical Center. 
* A 24-year-old alleged gang member, suspected of fatally stabbing a mother of 
four during a Thursday night crime rampage, surrendered to police in Long Beach 
Saturday afternoon. 
Darin Percy of Los Angeles was booked on suspicion of murder. Police allege he 
is the "actual knife-wielder" responsible for the death of Tomasa Rivas, 44, 
who was robbed as she returned from a grocery trip with her husband, Jesus 
Rivas, 52. Seven other suspects have been arrested in connection with the 
incident. 
