MARYLAND TOBACCO CROP GOES UP IN SMOKE; 
LIFE STYLE: FARMERS ARE GIVING UP A 350-YEAR-OLD TRADITION AND SWITCHING TO 
VEGETABLE GROWING. HOUSES ARE ALSO RAPIDLY REPLACING MANY FARMS. 
Sixty years of tobacco. That's how Henry Miller describes his life. His hands, 
wrinkled and stained from working the fields, have known nothing else. 
"I'm a tobacco farmer," Miller said, nodding his head for emphasis. "My 
family's been growing tobacco for 150 years." But after generations of 
harvesting almost 70 acres of the sweet, heavy-scented crop, Miller didn't 
plant a single acre this spring. 
"It's all over now," he said softly. "The Millers won't be growing tobacco 
anymore." 
Like hundreds of other Southern Maryland farmers, Miller has given up a 
350-year-old Maryland tradition. Caught between faltering demand for cigarettes 
and the scarcity of labor needed to work the fields, the farmers have stopped 
growing tobacco -- once considered the backbone of the state. 
But unlike many who were defeated, Miller is trying to hold onto his farm, 
which locals say was one of the biggest tobacco operations in the state. 
This year, he replaced his tobacco crop with vegetables. 
"People have to eat, but they don't have to smoke," Miller reasoned. 
Only 8,500 acres of tobacco were planted in Southern Maryland in 1989, 
according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Just seven years ago, more 
than 24,000 acres were devoted to the crop. While thousands of acres have been 
sold to developers, there are still many farmers, like Miller, who are trying 
to make the switch to other commodities. 
To help ease the transition, Maryland officials have converted the little-used 
state tobacco warehouse in Cheltenhem, near Waldorf, into a retail and 
wholesale produce market that gives the former tobacco farmers an outlet for 
their new crops. 
Since opening on July 3, the Southern Maryland Regional Farmers Market has 
swarmed with customers eager for squash, green beans and tomatoes. Virtually 
all of the 28 farmers who operate the produce stands are former tobacco 
farmers. 
Eileen Shlagel, one of the produce vendors, said the market will provide a 
desperately needed source of income. "Tobacco was the cash crop in Maryland," 
she said. "Without it, it's going to be hard to survive." Shlagel and her 
husband, Russell, plant more than 200 acres on a farm near Waldorf in Charles 
County. The farm has been in the family for more than 100 years, and until last 
year, tobacco was always part of the harvest. 
"I'd go back to tobacco if I could," Russell Shlagel said. "When you do 
something like that for such a long time, it's hard to make the switch. But 
we're going to try." 
The Shlagels' farm, once surrounded by other fields and greenery, now is 
bordered by subdivisions. The encroaching development has made life even more 
difficult, Russell Shlagel said. "I have to plan my manure spreading around the 
neighbors' weekend cookouts," he said. "Otherwise, we get lots of complaints. 
That's no way to run a farm." 
George B. Roche, marketing specialist with the Maryland Department of 
Agriculture, said houses are replacing tobacco farms at a rapid rate. "Houses 
are the No. 1 crop in Southern Maryland," he said. "With all of the developers 
out there offering such high prices for the land, it's no wonder more farmers 
haven't sold out." In 1982, there were about 2,400 farms in Prince George's, 
Anne Arundel, St. Mary's, Charles and Calvert counties, which traditionally 
make up Southern Maryland's tobacco belt. By 1987, that number had dropped more 
than 50%, to 1,300 farms, according to the U.S. Agriculture Census. Roche and 
other agriculture experts estimate that another 200 farms have been sold in the 
past two years. 
Gary Hodge, executive director of the Tri-County Council, a government group 
that represents St. Mary's, Charles and Calvert counties, said he hopes the 
produce market will keep more farmers from selling their land, thereby halting 
the rapid growth of residential and commercial development in the area. 
"This isn't just a problem for the farmer," Hodge said. "Everybody's 
complaining about overdevelopment. Unless we convince the farmers to stick 
around, we won't be able to control the growth." 
Hodge is quick to point out that tobacco still is Maryland's third largest 
crop, accounting for auction sales of $18 million this year and as much as $57 
million as recently as five years ago. But the 11.7 million pounds of tobacco 
that were sold in April still are a drop in the bucket when compared with 
national production levels. 
"In North Carolina auctions, that much tobacco can be sold in one day," Hodge 
said. Last year, the United States produced more than 2 billion pounds of 
tobacco, according to the USDA. Although flu-cured and burley tobaccos account 
for almost all of the nation's production, Maryland tobacco, known in the 
industry as Type 32, holds a special niche in the marketplace. Maryland's 
unique variety is valued because of its ability to hold a flame, and it has 
been particularly popular in Europe, where unfiltered cigarettes are common. 
Many packs of European cigarettes make a point to advertise that they contain 
Maryland-grown tobacco. Luxembourg even has a cigarette brand called Maryland. 
"Most people don't realize what a specialty Maryland tobacco is," said Peter 
Wilby, international marketing specialist with the state Department of 
Agriculture. "The state of Maryland was formed by the British to grow tobacco. 
Maryland tobacco was king." 
But as health concerns about the effects of tobacco have grown, tobacco use has 
fallen. And as farmers find other crops and farms give way to suburban 
development, the age-old way of life in Southern Maryland is slowly and, most 
say, inevitably coming to an end. 
Historically, much of the state's crop each year is purchased by Swiss 
cigarette manufacturers, although Type 32 tobacco also is used in small 
portions in some American cigarettes. While export demand for cigarettes is 
growing, domestic consumption continues to fall. 
U.S. cigarette production is expected to decline 2% to 3% from last year, said 
Bob Miller, a tobacco specialist with the USDA. 
At the same time, Europeans are smoking fewer cigarettes than ever before, 
Wilby said. "The Europeans liked to smoke a heavier cigarette, which got its 
flavor from the Maryland leaf. But they're changing to a milder blend, and 
they're smoking less and less," he said. 
Wilby estimates that exports account for only 25% of Maryland tobacco sales, 
compared with 50% just 10 years ago. 
Faced with the continued drop in demand, the Maryland Department of Agriculture 
is sponsoring trade missions to Asia, where cigarette consumption is on the 
rise. This year, South Korea purchased about 300,000 pounds of Maryland 
tobacco, a first-ever sale for the state. 
Wilby and others insist that if Maryland tobacco is to survive another decade, 
new markets must be found. But this year, only $7,500 was appropriated for 
marketing overseas, Hodge said. "We can't do much with $7,500," he said. "But 
you can't blame the state for not giving us more, given the market conditions." 
The farmers say it's only a matter of time before tobacco disappears from the 
fields. "I think its time is over," said Mary Stacsh, who owns more than 400 
acres on three farms but stopped growing tobacco this year. "For one thing, we 
won't have any land to raise it on. And with all the talk about smoking, how 
can we survive?" Agricultural experts, however, aren't as quick to dismiss the 
future of tobacco in the area. "I think we've leveled off," Roche said. "No, 
there won't be any more 60-acre growers. But people will keep planting a few 
acres each year. There will always be a demand for what Maryland has to offer." 
Farmers agree that the demand, though reduced, probably will continue. Still, 
they say they can't afford the labor to raise the crop. 
Tobacco farmers have resisted mechanization more than any other crop grown in 
the area, Roche said. The seeds are hand-planted in carefully protected beds 
late in the winter, and transplanted to the fields in the spring. In the 
summer, the flower buds must be removed by hand. 
In the late summer and fall, the plants must be cut down by hand and strung up 
in barns to cure and dry. After several weeks, the leaves must be stripped off 
the plants, graded and bundled, all by hand. The entire process takes about 14 
months. 
The USDA estimates that growing and harvesting an acre of tobacco takes an 
average of 230 worker-hours, compared with two to three worker-hours for one 
acre of corn. On the other hand, an acre of good tobacco can be worth $3,000 at 
auction, while an acre's worth of corn may have a market value of less than 
$300. 
Stacsh said she couldn't find enough labor to harvest her crop. "It's dirty, 
sweaty work," she said. "When they can work in McDonald's, where it's 
air-conditioned, and make the same money, why would anyone want to bother 
working tobacco?" 
So like the other farmers, Stacsh has stopped planting her traditional 40 acres 
of tobacco. She's also sold about 100 acres of her land to developers. 
David Martin, agricultural extension agent for Anne Arundel County, said the 
recent tobacco auction proved that there's more than demand at work on the 
market. In April, Maryland tobacco farmers enjoyed one of their best auction 
seasons in nearly a decade. Top-quality tobacco sold for about $1.60 per pound, 
close to the most recent peak years of 1981 and 1982. Despite the high prices, 
tobacco acreage continued to decline. 
"If we don't stop this process now, the whole support industry is going to go 
under," Roche said. "It reminds me of the strawberry production on the Eastern 
Shore. In the 1920s, the shore had the world's biggest production of 
strawberries. You'd never know that now." 
Roche is working furiously to see that the produce market succeeds, for in it 
he sees the future of the tobacco farmers. "The writing's on the wall," he 
said. "It's been there for 20 years. We're got to get these farmers to 
diversify." 
Billy Hatfield of Huntingtown appreciates the effort. "I don't want to dump my 
land. I'm a farmer. That's all I know," he said. 
Hatfield has replaced his 60 acres of tobacco with produce and corn. He sold 
cucumbers and summer squash at the wholesale market last week. "This is going 
to help us a lot," he said. "I've never sold wholesale before, but I guess I'll 
get used to it." 
