GENENTECH GETS OK ON DRUG FOR IMMUNE ILLNESS 
Genentech said Friday that it received Federal Food and Drug Administration 
approval to market a genetically engineered drug to fight chronic granulomatous 
disease, a rare, inherited disorder of the immune system. 
The drug, Actimmune, is a form of interferon gamma and is the first approval in 
the United States of a interferon gamma product. It is Genentech's third 
approval of a recombinant drug that it will market itself. 
Genentech developed Actimmune under the Orphan Drug Act, which will give it 
exclusive rights to market it for this particular disease for seven years. 
The company used the announcement of the approval as an opportunity to reaffirm 
its support for act. 
Although President Bush earlier this year vetoed one bill that would have 
altered the act, Genentech expects additional challenges to the law. 
Actimmune marketed for this disease won't be a blockbuster for the South San 
Francisco-based company -- although it hopes other proposed uses of interferon 
gamma will prove important sources of revenue. 
But for as many as 400 children across the country who suffer from chronic 
granulomatous disease, the FDA approval means they have a better chance of 
making it to adulthood. 
This rare immune system disorder used to be called "deadly granulomatous" 
because it so often claimed children before they reached age 12. 
Larry Hudson, a 13-year-old with the disease, will spend Christmas at home in 
Prospect, Ore., this year. Just this week, he went snow tubing for the first 
time. These ordinary events have special meaning to Larry's parents, Laqueta 
and Daniel Hudson. 
Laqueta Hudson perhaps makes the case for continued support of the drug act 
more elegantly than the company could. "This is a real blessing to have this 
drug," she said. "We're not living in terror anymore" and waiting for the next 
infection to strike. 
Larry is one of many children who have received the drug as part of clinical 
trials. 
He gets injections three times a week, which he says he doesn't like and tries 
to put off. 
But even that is better, he readily admits, than going through the hassles and 
pains of previous drugs and treatment. And especially, the infections. 
Five years ago, Larry was in the hospital for two months -- including Christmas 
-- recovering from surgery to remove a large growth on his brain and to treat 
many small tumor-like formations in his lung, both caused by the disease. 
For many parents, the treatment costs have been devastating, especially 
because, as an inherited disease, it often afflicts more than one child in a 
family. 
Dr. John Curnutte, an expert in the disease who conducted trials of Actimmune 
through Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation in La Jolla, said that in trials 
of the drug, there was a 70% decline in the number of serious infections and 
that patients spent only one-third the usual number of days in hospital. 
In Hobbs, N.M., two of the three children of Jeannene and Lenard Wagner have 
the disease. 
Having the drug approved is "an excellent Christmas present," said Jeannene 
Wagner. 
