NUTS &amp; BOLTS / PATRICK MOTT: POINSETTIAS BRIGHTEN SEASONS ALL YEAR 
If you think all that stuff about the Bermuda Triangle is just a clever 
marketing ploy to get you to buy yet another set of Time-Life books that you'll 
never read, you might want to take a minute to consider the poinsettia. 
Right now, they're everywhere. They're taking up thousands of little pots in 
dozens of shopping malls, ringing the bases of hundreds of big corporate 
Christmas trees, lining the steps of thousands of church altars. This week, the 
world is ablaze with poinsettias. 
So how come you never see a poinsettia in mid-January? Where do they go? Are 
they stolen by trolls? Are they eaten by reindeer? Or are they manufactured by 
some chemistry whiz who has managed to produce a plant that will dutifully 
vaporize after one month? 
The more likely explanation is that people manage to kill them off by the 
millions every year, one at a time, through the sure-fire expedient of neglect 
bolstered by the belief that the poinsettia is some sort of hothouse plant more 
delicate than a $10,000 tropical orchid that will crumble into crinkly, parched 
dust anyway. So they wait until the plant starts to look like the "after" 
picture on a box of weed killer and they chuck it down the trash chute. 
To these folks, the idea of a poinsettia living through the Fourth of July 
might seem about as plausible as Spike Lee wearing Florsheim wingtips. But the 
people at the Paul Ecke Poinsettia Ranch in Encinitas say you can maintain a 
poinsettia through the dog days, right on past Halloween and Thanksgiving and 
on into next Christmas. 
And they should know. They're the largest grower of poinsettias in the country. 
The Ecke Ranch grows more than 80 different sizes, shapes and colors of the 
plant in 35 acres of greenhouses. They estimate that more than 90% of all 
flowering poinsettia plants produced in the world get their start at the 
Encinitas ranch. 
So when they tell me that with a little care and vigilance I can have the same 
poinsettia on my coffee table next year, in full flower, I believe them. There 
are several steps involved, but they're fairly easy to remember because, 
according to the Ecke people, most correspond to holidays. It works like this: 
The modern poinsettia, according to the instructions, will retain its bright 
leaves (called bracts) for many weeks, longer, undoubtedly, than many people 
expect. All that's needed during its flowering time is regular watering (every 
three to four days) and the regular and moderate use of a fertilizer in dry, 
liquid, pill or stick form at the rate recommended on the package. If you care 
for the flowering plant properly, you'll start to notice side shoots beginning 
to develop in January. Cut the fading bracts back on St. Patrick's Day (March 
17) and continue the schedule of watering and fertilizing. By Memorial Day (May 
30), the Ecke Ranch folks say your plant may have developed into a mature 
height of 2 to 3 feet with several branches and large leaves. 
This is the time to repot the plant into a larger container and move it 
outdoors for the summer. Cut back all the shoots to 6 inches on the Fourth of 
July to promote the development of more side branches, all the time continuing 
to water and fertilize the plant. 
Labor Day begins the homestretch. Move your poinsettia inside at that time and 
give it at least 6 hours of direct light in a sunny window without curtains. 
About a month later, on Columbus Day, darkness becomes important. For the 
bracts and the tiny yellow flowers to develop, the plant needs at least 6 hours 
of bright light each day, followed by at least 12 hours in absolute darkness at 
a maximum night temperature of 65 degrees. So, starting Oct. 12, plan on moving 
the plant around a lot. It takes eight to 10 weeks for the bracts to develop 
their full holiday lushness. 
(Important note if you have children or pets: poinsettias are toxic if they're 
ingested. If eaten in large amounts, they can cause severe stomach pains.) 
You can also cut back the plant any time during its growing season to control 
its size. You should make the last pruning in mid-August. 
You can grow plants from the cuttings by rooting them in a pot filled with 
potting soil after dusting the base of the cutting with a rooting powder. 
Insert the cuttings into the soil, water them well and place the pot and the 
cuttings into a large polyethylene bag. 
Seal the bag and put it in a brightly lit area with a surrounding temperature 
of 65 to 70 degrees. Roots will begin to form in 14 to 18 days. Punch holes in 
the bag when the cuttings begin to grow. When the plant begins to mature, the 
bag can be removed. 
And, if you like, you can put them into the ground as a bedding plant, along 
with the other annuals in your garden. The care for a bedding poinsettia is the 
same as for a potted one. 
Not everyone, of course, is going to follow this advice, and the Ecke Ranch 
probably counts on that. If everyone painstakingly kept alive every poinsettia 
they had ever been given, they would start sprouting out of the roof tiles. 
But give it a try, this year anyway. If only for the sheer fun of getting to 
tell people who drop over for a little lemonade during Indian summer next 
October that the plant you have tucked away in your light-tight darkroom -- the 
one that looks as if it's been cultivated in a greenhouse for the past several 
months -- is a poinsettia. 
Tell them you learned the technique from the "Bizarre Secrets of the Ancients" 
gardening book. 
