U.S. GETS 2-0 LEAD IN SINGLES; 
DAVIS CUP: AGASSI RALLIES FOR A FIVE-SET VICTORY AND CHANG SWEEPS THE SECOND 
MATCH. 
So, Michael Chang, this Davis Cup thing, is it over? Is it all downhill from 
here? 
"Downhill -- I thought you said Down Under," Chang joked. 
That is the approximate location of Australia's Davis Cup hopes, which appear 
to be buried beneath the crushed red clay court of the Suncoast Dome, where 
17,994 watched Chang and Andre Agassi propel the United States to a 2-0 lead 
over the Aussies. 
It wasn't easy for Agassi, who labored 3 hours 36 minutes before slipping past 
Richard Fromberg, 4-6, 6-2, 4-6, 6-2, 6-4, and then made the surprising 
announcement that he nearly pulled out on Wednesday because of the flu. 
But now all that stands between the United States and its first Davis Cup title 
in eight years is one victory in the last three matches, which could happen 
today when the doubles are played. 
So is it over? No, said U.S. Captain Tom Gorman, who admitted with a straight 
face: "We feel very, very good about it." 
No team has won the Davis Cup after losing the first two matches since 
Australia in 1939. 
The current Aussie reaction? 
"We got the job in front of us," Captain Neale Fraser said. 
The job became tougher Friday night after the two crushing defeats, 
administered first by Agassi and then Chang. But while Chang's 6-2, 7-6 (7-4), 
6-0 victory over Darren Cahill was a picture of simplicity, Agassi experienced 
an unexpected rash of problems in his match against Fromberg because of flu. 
"If I could go back in time, Aaron (Krickstein) would be playing right now," 
Agassi said. Krickstein is an alternate on the U.S. team. 
Gorman, who said he alerted Krickstein last weekend to standby, said it was 
obvious to him that Agassi was not up to strength against Fromberg. 
"I noticed a big difference in him," Gorman said. "I'm right on the court, so I 
can see it in his face." 
The flu couldn't knock out Agassi, but Fromberg managed to come pretty close. 
Fromberg, who has curly hair and a dead straight serve, rifled 15 aces past 
Agassi. At one point, the Aussie led, two sets to one, and felt downright cocky 
about his Davis Cup debut. 
"I was feeling pretty confident I was going to win," Fromberg said. 
And why not? To hear Agassi tell it, it sounded as if he came off his deathbed 
to play. Agassi said he didn't eat Sunday, Monday or Tuesday, but he informed 
Gorman on Wednesday that he would be able to play after all. 
Agassi blamed his bout with flu, not Fromberg, for a less-than-spectacular 
performance. 
"I felt like I was losing it more than he was winning it," Agassi said. 
"There's no question the virus has taken a toll on me. I was tired. I was much 
weaker than I thought I would be." 
Even so, Agassi said he never saw a doctor during his illness and neither did 
he take any medication, although he expects to be fine for his match Sunday 
against Cahill. 
Cahill, who was swept in 2 hours 11 minutes, did not seem to take Agassi's 
illness seriously. 
"Did he look sick to you?" Cahill asked. "I don't listen to what he says." 
However, Gorman does, and he hinted that Agassi would not play Sunday if the 
United States has already clinched the Davis Cup. 
For a while, this did not seem likely. Agassi had won only one of six other 
five-set matches and was teetering on the edge of another as Fromberg 
dispatched a convoy of big serves at him, the balls bouncing off the backstops 
behind the baseline. 
With the United States down a set after the third set, there was a 15-minute 
break and once play was resumed, Fromberg found his momentum had chilled. 
"It was my first Davis Cup match and my first break, and when I came back out I 
was a little bit cold," Fromberg said. "I felt the first game was really 
crucial." 
Agassi broke Fromberg in the first game of the fourth set, closed it out in a 
hurry, then power-stroked his way to a 5-2 lead in the fifth set. Agassi became 
more aggressive in the final set, in which he accounted for 24 of his 75 
winners. 
But serving for the match, Agassi failed to win a point. When Fromberg held at 
love, Agassi served again for the match at 5-4. This time, he ended it, but not 
before Fromberg forced a third match point. 
Agassi had blown the first one when he went for too big of a shot and slugged a 
forehand wide. He missed the second when he hesitated and came in halfheartedly 
behind his second serve with Fromberg returning the ball at Agassi's feet. 
The third match point he didn't let get away. Agassi blasted a forehand past 
Fromberg, who seemed rooted at the baseline, then raised his arms in 
celebration and was soon running off the court with his index fingers in the 
air. 
It was a relieved if somewhat blanched Agassi that entered the interview room. 
"I don't think I took him lightly, but I anticipated being in a little more 
control than that," Agassi said. "Coming into the match, I anticipated me 
winning it a lot easier than that." 
Such is the elevation of Agassi's confidence that he expects to win easily even 
if he was so sick he nearly withdrew two days before. Fromberg, for one, wasn't 
swallowing Agassi story of a three-day fast. 
"It's a bit of rubbish, really," Fromberg said. 
Australians Pat Cash and John Fitzgerald will have the edge in Davis Cup 
experience in today's doubles match against Americans Rick Leach and Jim Pugh. 
Cash and Fitzgerald are 6-2 in Davis Cup matches starting in 1985. Leach and 
Pugh are undefeated in three matches, all in 1990. 
"This is a good chance to prove ourselves," Leach said. "We know it'll be a 
tough match." 
