OBITUARIES 
Ayala, Oscar E., infant, of Lancaster. Halley-Olsen Funeral Chapel, Lancaster. 
Bostick, Jerry D., 58, of Lancaster, auto painter. Halley-Olsen Funeral Chapel, 
Lancaster. 
Broffman, Mittsy E., 66, of Northridge, secretary for Charter House 
Investments. Bastian &amp; Perrott Mortuary, Northridge. 
Clausman, Joseph Henry, 84, of North Hollywood, truck driver. Forest Lawn 
Mortuary, Hollywood Hills. 
Clinesmith, Eugene D. Sr., 72, of Chatsworth, truck driver for CBS Studios. 
Bastian &amp; Perrott Mortuary, Northridge. 
DeForest, Esther M., 79, of Burbank, laundry worker. Forest Lawn Mortuary, 
Hollywood Hills. 
Elliott, Anthony Leo, 89, of Burbank, retired accountant for Northrop Corp. 
Forest Lawn Mortuary, Hollywood Hills. 
Garcia, Alba L., 47, of Arleta, homemaker. Pierce Brothers Meyer-Mitchell 
Mortuary, Van Nuys. 
Grant, Kara, 5, of Canyon Country, student at Skyblue Mesa Elementary School. 
Eternal Valley Mortuary, Newhall. 
Greene, Margaret J., 91, of Burbank, homemaker. The Valley Funeral Home, 
Burbank. 
Guppy, Gilbert R., 73, of Panorama City, retired owner of carpet cleaning 
company. Praiswater Funeral Home, Van Nuys. 
Hoffman, Samuel, 85, of Van Nuys, retired claims representative for Social 
Security Administration. Glasband-Willen Mortuary, North Hollywood. 
Hulsizer, Vera, 75, of Canyon Country, homemaker. Eternal Valley Mortuary, 
Newhall. 
Humphrey, Byrd J., 48, of Burbank. Pierce Brothers Valhalla Mortuary, North 
Hollywood. 
Jackson, Raymond Herman, 59, of Lancaster, mathematician for NASA. Murphy 
Mortuary, Lancaster. 
Kuykendall, Shirley A., 58, of Van Nuys, office manager. Gates, Kingsley &amp; 
Gates Mortuary, Canoga Park. 
Lapaz, Edward M., 76, of Sepulveda, retired materials representative. 
Utter-McKinley Mortuary, Mission Hills. 
Marlowe-Schonberger, La Vada, 66, of Panorama City, singer. Forest Lawn 
Mortuary, Hollywood Hills. 
Mendoza, Luis A., 88, of San Fernando, retired construction worker. Noble 
Chapel, San Fernando. 
Minas, Noobar, 94, of Sherman Oaks, homemaker. Pierce Brothers Valhalla 
Mortuary, North Hollywood. 
Mitchell, Rose M., 76, of Newhall, homemaker. Eternal Valley Mortuary, Newhall. 
Monroe, Helen T., 71, of Northridge, retired teacher. Bastian &amp; Perrott 
Mortuary, Northridge. 
Nevarez, Francisca, 80, of San Fernando, homemaker. J.T. Oswald Mortuary, San 
Fernando. 
Rash, Eldon E. Jr., 49, of Lancaster, laborer. Halley-Olsen Funeral Chapel, 
Lancaster. 
Rhoades, Helen E., 85, of Canoga Park, homemaker. Forest Lawn Mortuary, 
Hollywood Hills. 
Seelinger, Ethel W., 97, of Chatsworth, retired seamstress for Van Vorst 
Mattress Co. Praiswater Funeral Home, Van Nuys. 
Scharnell, Donald G. Jr., 33, of Lancaster, registered nurse. Halley-Olsen 
Funeral Chapel, Lancaster. 
Taylor, Jessie R., 85, of Valencia, homemaker. Forest Lawn Mortuary, Glendale. 
Tegner, Edgar F., 82, of Burbank, owner of real estate agency. Forest Lawn 
Mortuary, Hollywood Hills. 
West, Herbert L., 74, of Glendale, retired service manager. Pierce Brothers 
Valhalla Mortuary, North Hollywood. 
Woodson, John E., 45, of Calabasas, crisis counselor. Pierce 
Brothers-Praiswater Mortuary, Canoga Park. 
