CHRISTMAS SPIRIT KEEPS ON LIVING WITH RENTED TREES; 
YULETIDE: ENTREPRENEUR HOPES HIS SERVICE WILL PROVE AN ALTERNATIVE TO PROVIDING 
FODDER FOR COMPOST HEAPS. 
Loyd R. Johnson thought it was a shame that perfectly good Christmas trees 
ended up as compost after the holidays. 
"I kind of wondered for years if there was an alternative to buying dead 
trees," he said, referring to the cut trees commonly sold. "If people were 
willing to spend $20 to $25 for a dead tree, would they be willing to spend the 
same to have it living?" 
Thus was born Johnson's Christmas-tree rental service, which in this, his first 
year, leased 1,200 live trees throughout the San Diego area. 
Johnson said he made no profit this year because he had to buy each tree he 
rented. But next year, already owning many of the trees he needs, he expects 
his expenses will be far lower and hopes to begin making a good profit. 
Customers placed orders by phone and Johnson delivered the trees rooted in 
planters. He will pick them up after the holidays so he can care for them next 
year at his five-acre spread in this rustic community east of San Diego. 
By next Christmas, the trees should be about a foot taller, making them more 
attractive to people who have homes with high ceilings as well as for office 
buildings, he said. 
"I lost a lot of business in La Jolla because the trees weren't big enough for 
the high ceilings in the houses," he said. 
Once the trees get too big to move, Johnson said he will donate them to 
organizations such as the Boy and Girl Scouts. 
Johnson said that if his idea catches on, cut Christmas trees may be obsolete 
in three to five years. 
Some of his customers already have said they want the same trees next year. 
Renee Augustine of La Mesa said that although the tree she rented is not as 
tall as those she usually gets, she is pleased with the idea that she can get 
the same tree a foot taller next year. 
Augustine, originally from Ohio, also likes having a Christmas tree that is not 
chopped down. Live trees also drop fewer needles than cut trees. 
"Every day I go by the tree at work and I say, 'That tree looks so dry,' and it 
is so brittle and mine is nice and fresh," Augustine said. 
Although Johnson, 49, had thought about opening a tree rental business for 
years, his firm was born of personal tragedy. 
His wife, Jennifer Shawn Johnson, 28, died in October, 1988, in a car accident. 
The couple's children, Mikayla, 7, and Philip, 6, survived. 
"All of a sudden I found myself being Mr. Mom," Johnson said. 
Wanting to spend more time with his children than his job as a tile-setter 
would allow, he decided the time was right to start the business, called Living 
Trees of Alpine. 
Response has been positive, Johnson said, adding that if all goes as planned he 
will rent about 5,000 trees next year. He also plans to offer more types of 
trees. 
This year he carries Aleppo, Monterey and Italian stone pines, none of which 
are traditional Christmas trees. He hopes to offer Noble and Douglas firs next 
year. 
Each renter is asked to sign an agreement promising not to put any chemicals on 
the tree and to remove any aluminum icicles before it is returned. 
Rental prices range from $20 for a 2-to 3-foot tree to $32 for a 5-to 6-foot 
tree. 
"All they have to do is water (them) and they can treat them like any other 
tree," Johnson said. "All they have to do is dress it up." 
