WATCH THOSE WHALES; 
UP AND DOWN THE COAST, EXCURSIONS AND WORKSHOPS ABOUND 
It's the end of December, time for the annual migration of out-of-town 
relatives and their slightly larger, less chatty kin, California gray whales. 
From now until March, these behemoth beauties (the whales, not Aunt Tilly) will 
cruise Orange County's shoreline en route from their summer homes off the 
Alaska coast to Baja's balmy lagoons and back. Whale watchers of all ages can 
participate in several educational workshops and cruises countywide. 
According to Harry Helling, associate director of the Orange County Marine 
Institute, the great grays are typically spotted three to five miles off the 
coastline and even have been known to appear in area harbors. But pinpointing 
when they'll be seen can be trickier. 
"We're talking about wild animals, so it's really anybody's guess," Helling 
said. "But generally, sightings begin right after Christmas, then crescendo to 
a peak period in late January or early February, slow down, then pick up again 
in early-to-mid-March." 
The average gray takes about four months to complete a trip from Alaska to 
Baja, generally departing in mid-September and arriving in mid-January or 
mid-February, Helling said. After calving in the warmer waters (the bouncing 
babies average 15 feet long), the new families begin their homeward trek in 
late February. They may be seen in groups of three to five or singly. 
To bring novice whale watchers up to speed, the Marine Institute offers a 
marine wildlife excursion program -- three weekends of slide shows, 
naturalist-led discussions and cruises -- at its Dana Point facility (24200 
Dana Point Harbor Drive, (714) 496-2274.) 
The lectures, to be held Feb. 2, 3, 16 and 17 and March 9 and 10, will cover 
basic migration habits, human impact on whales and an overview of marine 
mammals on the California coast. Gray whale and sea lion skeletons and the 
bones of smaller marine animals will be on view. There are tentative plans for 
a puppet show and other children's activities. 
A 2 1/2-hour cruise aboard the 65-foot Cortez, skippered by naturalist Mike 
Burske, will be offered before and after each seminar. 
"Mike is a master at finding whales," Helling said. "He spent about five years 
doing research on gray whales in San Ignacio Lagoon, one of the chief calving 
areas in Baja. He's very sensitive to the whales and is careful to approach 
them in ways that won't disturb them but will still offer good views." 
Tickets for the Institute's whale watch are $11 to $14; children younger than 5 
may attend the workshop but are not permitted on the boat. 
Farther inland, Suzanne Campbell, a naturalist at the Oak Canyon Nature Center 
in Anaheim Hills (6700 Walnut Canyon Road, (714) 998-8380) will hold a free 
introductory workshop on whale watching Saturday, Feb. 9. Campbell will discuss 
the whales' homeward journey, help visitors select the right excursion for them 
and offer pointers to make their trip more enjoyable (see box). 
Here are three commercial whale watching operations: 
* Davey's Locker Sportfishing in Newport Beach offers 2 1/2-hour trips 
departing several times daily from the Balboa Pavillion. Members of the local 
chapter of the American Cetacean Society will narrate and answer questions on 
board the 77-foot boat, which features inside and outside viewing areas and a 
snack bar. An added plus: If you don't spot a whale, you'll be given a rain 
check good for a free trip on another day. Tickets run from $6 to $11. (714) 
673-1434. 
* Dana Wharf Sportfishing offers three two-hour narrated cruises each day from 
Dana Point Harbor aboard a 65-foot powerboat that has inside and outside 
viewing areas and a galley. Rain checks are offered during the first part of 
the season only. Tickets: $6 to $10. (714) 496-5794. 
* The Spike Africa, the 70-foot wooden-hulled schooner featured in the movie 
"Joe vs. the Volcano," will depart four times each weekend from Newport Harbor. 
A member of the American Cetacean Society will be aboard to provide pointers 
and answer questions. Catering services are planned. Tickets: $25. (714) 
642-9988. 
For general information, call the American Cetacean Society whale watch office 
at (714) 675-9881. 
