A FAMILY FELINE TAKES THE MEASURE OF A MAN; 
CATS: ANYONE WHO WOULD CALL THESE ANIMALS DOMESTICATED HAS NOT PONDERED THEIR 
BEWITCHERY AT 4 A.M. 
I announced it and meant it: No cats. I am an austere father, deaf to the 
entreaties of children chafing beneath parental sovereignty. Well, deaf to the 
entreaties of male children. But then, there is Victoria, who is 9 and perfect 
and has eyes that express entreaties in the most melting manner. She wanted a 
cat for Christmas. 
Let me tell you about our cat. 
Winston is white and, like Victoria, is alternately sweet and volatile, playful 
and somber -- and lovely to look at. A cat does furnish a room. Like a graceful 
vase, a cat, even when motionless, seems to flow. But a cat also is a 
flawlessly designed killer. 
It is lost in the mists of history, the moment when cats condescended to adopt 
people. From this transaction, cats got room and board. People got 
civilization. 
Cats are carnivores that prey on vegetarians. When humans advanced from 
hunter-gatherers to tillers of soil, they needed cats. Agriculture, and hence 
everything else, depends upon storage of surpluses, and hence depends on 
control of mice and rats. Small wonder Egyptians worshiped cats. Later, when 
Europe was swept by plagues, cats helped control rodents that were disease 
carriers. 
Cats sleep more than other mammals -- 16 hours a day, a few minutes ("cat 
naps") at a time -- but even in deepest sleep their brains are as active as 
when they are awake, processing information. The stories of cats bolting from 
buildings just before earthquakes or volcanic eruptions are true. The myth of a 
feline "sixth sense" reflects the refinement of the five senses, including the 
ability to sense minute tremors and changes in air pressure. 
Although there are about 500 million domestic cats in the world (and more 
strays than that), in a sense the phrase "domestic cat" is an oxymoron. The 
cat-and-mouse "game" of trap-and-release that a cat plays with a prey before 
killing it is rare in the wild. It is the behavior of cats with too few 
opportunities to express their instinct to kill. 
However, cats kill for natural, ecologically rational reasons. That is more 
than can be said for mankind, which has made cats the focus of virulent 
superstitions. For centuries the Christian church encouraged the belief that 
cats were associated with -- even were -- witches. Some persons convicted of 
witchcraft were drowned in sacks full of cats. Among the festivities at the 
coronation of Queen Elizabeth in 1558 was the burning of an effigy of the Pope 
-- stuffed with live cats. Even in 19th-Century France, some Christian 
festivals included roasting baskets full of live cats, whose ashes were 
considered sources of good luck. 
J. C. Suares, who has written much about cats and recounts these and other 
atrocities, wonders what in the nature of cats (dogs have no similar history) 
taunts humans to fury. The answer may be in the fact that Julius Caesar, 
Genghis Khan, Napoleon and Mussolini hated cats, surely because cats are 
embodiments of independence. (It is said that cats even purr to please 
themselves.) 
But if solitariness and inscrutability arouse against cats the brute that 
sleeps lightly in mankind, those qualities make cats especially suitable 
companions for creative people, because creativity requires solitude. 
Isaac Newton took time off from finding laws of physics to invent the "cat 
flap" that enables cats to avoid the ultimate cat horror, the closed door. 
Samuel Johnson took time off from dictionary-writing to shop for oysters for 
his cat Hodge. One of Charles Dickens' cats used his paw to snuff out Dickens' 
candle when the cat thought it was time to play. Henry James, he of the feline 
subtlety of syntax, would sometimes write with a cat on his shoulder. Mark 
Twain, who, like Hemingway, kept cats (Hemingway as many as 30 at a time), 
believed that, "If man could be crossed with the cat, it would improve man but 
deteriorate the cat." 
As a cat fancier has written, your cat is undoubtedly the cleanest member of 
your household and the only one who eats no more than necessary. And Winston is 
a user-friendly cat. In fact, too much so. 
He and I need to come to an understanding about this practice of putting his 
nose on the nose of Victoria's father at 4 a.m., an act which, the day after 
Christmas, caused the iron to enter my soul: I now have three children, two 
dogs and a cat. That's it. No more. I am an immovable object: No more pets. 
Unless Victoria, wants a horse, in which case. . . . It is said that as long as 
little girls are interested in quadrupeds (horses are another of Victoria's 
passions), they are not apt to develop strong interests in bipeds of the boy 
variety. I plan to have cats and other pets for a while.DR, Punch 
