SOVIET TEAM TO VISIT O.C. SDI TEST SITE 
Soviet scientists will arrive in Orange County this month to visit a sensitive 
"Star Wars" test facility near San Clemente for an unprecedented briefing on 
the controversial space-based defense program, military officials said Tuesday. 
"We hope that the visit will lead to Soviet understanding and eventual 
acceptance of U.S. proposals . . . for regular and reciprocal visits to (space 
defense) laboratories" in both countries, the Pentagon said in a prepared 
statement. 
Soviet delegates to space arms control talks in Geneva officially accepted the 
2-month-old invitation last Friday, said Lt. Col. Alan R. Freitag, a spokesman 
for the Pentagon's Strategic Defense Initiative Organization. 
The SDI program, better known as "Star Wars," is intended eventually to provide 
a partial shield against an incoming ballistic missile attack with a network of 
space-based lasers, particle beams and other high-technology weaponry. 
In addition to visiting the Orange County test site, the Soviet delegation will 
tour a second SDI research facility at the Los Alamos National Laboratory in 
New Mexico, Freitag said. 
"I can say with authority that we have never (before) entertained Soviet 
visitors at SDI research facilities," he noted. 
Details of the visit still are being worked out in Geneva, and a firm date for 
the trip has not been set, but both sides have agreed that it will take place 
this month, according to a U.S. State Department official who asked not to be 
named. 
The United States expects that the Soviets will send a delegation of about 20 
to 30 scientists and technicians and that the visit will last about a week, the 
official said. 
"We're spring-loaded," said Freitag. "We have been preparing for a visit, so we 
can make this happen whenever they tell us they're coming." 
Several officials said the visit will be strictly business. "There are no 
extracurricular activities planned," one official said. 
According to the Pentagon statement, "One purpose of this initiative is to 
demonstrate further U.S. openness and build confidence between the U.S. and the 
Soviet Union by allowing the Soviets to learn more about U.S. SDI research and 
by reducing the risk of future technological surprise." 
The visit also could serve as a model for future visits by U.S. scientists to 
Soviet test sites, the statement added. 
The Orange County research facility, operated by TRW Inc., is on a 2,000-acre 
site on Avenida Pico just outside San Clemente, inland from Interstate 5. It is 
formally known as the TRW Capistrano Test Site, although technically its 
grounds are on unincorporated county land. 
Established about 20 years ago, the facility largely has been used to test 
satellite antennas, TRW spokeswoman Montye C. Male said. 
Under a $200-million contract with the government, TRW also uses the site to 
test a potent chemical laser, known as the "alpha laser," for use in the SDI 
program. 
Currently in the early stages of development, the laser eventually will be 
enlarged and installed on a space-based platform to test its ability to both 
detect and destroy incoming missiles armed with nuclear warheads, Freitag said. 
Such tests are planned for the middle to late 1990s, he said. 
As originally proposed by former President Ronald Reagan in 1983, SDI would 
have shielded the nation with an impenetrable shield of space-based defenses. 
In recent months, however, members of the Bush Administration have 
significantly lowered official expectations for the program. Officials now 
acknowledge that SDI would offer only partial protection against incoming 
missiles. 
