TAXI LAW IS IDLING WHILE CITY HALL FOES GRIND THEIR GEARS 
As the Los Angeles City Council saw things last summer, the New Year would mark 
the beginning of a kinder, gentler era for taxi drivers and their passengers. 
Cabbies would adhere to a dress code that banned such items as tank tops and 
cutoff shorts. New drivers would undergo training programs and veterans would 
attend refresher courses. "Communications skills" and "passenger relations" 
would be emphasized. Neatness and cleanliness would be stressed. 
And if the reeducation efforts needed a push, a system of fines -- the city's 
first for cab drivers -- would be on the books as an added incentive. 
But the elaborate new taxi industry regulation program, approved by the City 
Council in August, is languishing in the City Hall bureaucracy. It has no 
chance of taking effect by Jan. 1 or anytime soon, city officials concede. 
The ordinance that would allow the city's Department of Transportation to begin 
teaching, policing and fining cab drivers has been sitting in the council's 
Transportation Committee for months, apparently awaiting approval of a 
technical change added by the city attorney's office. 
The situation has infuriated Mayor Tom Bradley's office and rekindled its feud 
with Councilman Nate Holden, who chairs the Transportation Committee and is a 
Bradley foe. Earlier this year, Holden was blamed for holding onto Bradley's 
rush-hour truck ban proposal, delaying it for months before sending it to the 
council for a vote. 
The taxi ordinance was a compromise worked out by Bradley's office after the 
city's Department of Transportation recommended that existing taxi franchises 
not be renewed, but be put out for open bidding. 
In return for keeping their franchises, the cabbies agreed to the new system of 
fines for infractions of a new set of rules. 
"There are several important transportation initiatives that are bottled up in 
Councilman Holden's committee, including new taxicab regulations," Deputy Mayor 
Mark Fabiani said Tuesday. "We would hope that these . . . could be moved 
forward as soon as possible." 
Several council members and assistants familiar with the issue also blame 
Holden, who, they say, will not send the measure to the council for final 
approval because it originated with Bradley. Speaking about the situation on 
the condition that they not be quoted, they said they did not want to get into 
a public fight with Holden, who controls most transportation-related 
legislation. 
Holden on Tuesday denied he was delaying the taxi regulation and blamed the 
city attorney's office and the mayor's office for the snag, saying they had 
sent him a poorly drafted ordinance. 
Nevertheless, Holden said, "If the taxi thing is in the committee, then I want 
to hear it at the next meeting." He said he plans to deal with it at a 
committee meeting in January. 
Whatever the cause of the delay, the city has been losing an estimated $12,000 
in fine revenue it could be collecting each month and using to pay for taxi 
driver school. 
