NORTHWEST PLANNED TO DISCLOSE BOMB THREAT AT THE GATE 
Northwest Airlines did not plan to notify passengers of a bomb threat against 
its Paris-to-Detroit flight until they arrived at the boarding gate today, 
airline officials said Friday. But after the threat was disclosed in a Swedish 
newspaper, the airline made it public Thursday, two days in advance of today's 
scheduled departure, officials said. 
As many as 30 passengers are said to have asked for a different flight, 
according to the Associated Press. However, many passengers are still unaware 
of the threat and will only find out today when they arrive at the gate, 
Northwest officials said. 
The predicament of Northwest Flight 51 illustrates dilemmas facing all airlines 
when terrorist threats are made. Most, including Northwest, say they will 
inform passengers in advance as a matter of policy. However, such publicity 
could hurt the ability of authorities to investigate the threats. 
But in most cases, notification well in advance is often impossible because 
threats usually come only moments before flights are scheduled to depart. Most 
threats turn out to be hoaxes. 
"If we get to the point where we felt there was a possibility of serious harm 
toward a passenger or a plane, we would then make a public announcement," said 
Donald Morrison, a spokesman for Trans World Airlines. 
The controversy heated up about a year ago when Pan American World Airways 
Flight 103 was blown up over Lockerbie, Scotland, killing 259 passengers. The 
Federal Aviation Administration had learned about a threat to a Pan Am flight 
between West Germany and the United States based on a single phone call. But 
the phone call was later termed a hoax by the airline, and Pan Am did not 
inform passengers. 
What makes the Northwest case somewhat different is that the threat was made so 
much before flight time, giving authorities more time to investigate and beef 
up security. 
Northwest won't say when it got the threat. But when it did, the airline said, 
it immediately notified authorities. 
When a newspaper in Sweden ran a story that there had been a threat against the 
flight, it triggered an agreement between the Minneapolis-based carrier and 
U.S. and French government authorities. The agreement specified that if there 
were any leaks about the threat, the airline could also make it public. 
"We were working with the Central Intelligence Agency, the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation, the State Department and French law enforcement agencies," said 
Bob Gibbons, a Northwest spokesman. "Their recommendation was to keep the 
threat as private as possible for as long as possible. In their view it was 
better to investigate in private than to have high public attention and we 
agreed." 
Most of the 130 people who have reservations on the DC-10 for Detroit and San 
Francisco won't find out about the threat until they get to the airport anyway. 
Gibbons said it is very difficult to reach people and that some passengers may 
not be aware of news reports. 
Northwest won't detail any of what it labeled as "heightened security 
precautions" on all of its transatlantic flights. 
"If the good guys want to catch the bad guys, then the good guys cannot tell 
the bad guys everything they are doing," Gibbons said. 
Northwest says the publicity has not affected other overseas or domestic 
flights, because the threat was directed at a specific flight and because 
attention has been drawn to additional security precautions being taken. 
The final decision on whether the plane departs will be the pilot's, Gibbons 
said. 
Airlines willing to discuss security measures say they generally notify 
passengers if threats are taken seriously. 
American Airlines said it takes every bomb threat seriously and evaluates each 
case. Delta Air Lines spokesman Jim Lundy said that "when we get a threat and 
we consider it as being serious we make every attempt to keep the passengers 
informed." 
But the airlines say there are so many threats that each one must be analyzed. 
FAA spokesman Robert Buckhorn said there are more than 300 bomb threats a year, 
and most of them turn out to be hoaxes. 
"When we get a threat we almost always unload the passengers, unload the bags, 
we advise passengers of the security situation and allow them to choose an 
alternative," Northwest's Gibbons said. 
A Pan Am spokeswoman, Pam Hanlon, said late Friday that the airline always had 
a policy of informing passengers of bomb threats when they are against specific 
airlines and when they are considered serious. This, she insisted, has been the 
airline's policy both before and after the Lockerbie tragedy on Dec. 21, 1988. 
