GORBACHEV GETS OK FOR VOTES ON LAND, UNITY PACT 
A testy Mikhail S. Gorbachev, reasserting his leadership in Parliament, won 
backing Monday to launch key referendums on retaining a united Soviet Union and 
on permitting the private ownership of land. 
The Soviet president also gained the approval, largely symbolic, of the 
Congress of People's Deputies, the national Parliament, for his blueprint to 
reunite the country's restive republics in a renewed union. 
But several of the 15 republics are likely to refuse to hold the referendums, 
and the name of that union may differ from that planned by Gorbachev. 
He had proposed to replace the ideological "Socialist" in the "Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics" with "Sovereign," but the Congress, living up to its 
reputation as a highly conservative body, voted 1,365 to 189 to recommend that 
the old name be retained. 
The vote, orchestrated by Congress Chairman Anatoly I. Lukyanov, brought a 
wrathful outburst from Gorbachev, who snapped, "I don't understand why these 
maneuvers are going on here, including by the chairman." 
That Gorbachev would lash out at Lukyanov, who has always been a model of loyal 
devotion, reflected the deep trouble in his inner circle, which has already 
been shaken in the past week by Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze's 
dramatic resignation and rare criticism from Prime Minister Nikolai I. Ryzhkov. 
Gorbachev continued in a sharp tone to propose the two referendums, asserting 
his constitutional right as president to introduce legislation. 
They passed easily, each garnering only a few dozen "no" votes among the almost 
2,000 deputies. 
But deputies did question why a nationwide referendum is required when the 
republics should be able to decide for themselves whether they want to remain 
in the Soviet Union under the terms of a new union treaty. Gorbachev won 
approval on Monday for the outline that will be used as the basis for treaty 
negotiations with the republics. 
The Baltic republics of Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia, as well as the southern 
republic of Georgia, have announced that they want full independence, but the 
vast Slavic heartland and Central Asia appear willing to remain joined -- on 
their own terms. 
Gorbachev's response to the deputies was angry: "We are talking about the 
expression of the people's will on the core question of the life of the 
country." 
Several lawmakers also protested that it is foolish to hold the referendum on 
the country's unity nationwide when it is really only needed in republics that 
are openly seeking secession. 
But Gorbachev stuck to his formula that every single citizen of the Soviet 
Union must be asked if he backs "a renewed union as a federation of equal 
Soviet socialist sovereign republics." 
In a clear concession to conservatives, he added the word socialist to the 
language of the referendum after the vote on the country's name, saying that 
"the Congress has taken its position and I join it." 
Philosophically, Gorbachev argues that the questions on the two referendums are 
so important that the people must be asked directly. 
Tactically, however, the referendums allow him to get around the defiant 
parliaments of the country's 15 constituent republics, all of which have 
declared their sovereignty. 
The question of private land ownership is one of the most divisive in Soviet 
society. Reformists argue that only farmers who own their plots truly care 
about what they produce, while Communist Party hard-liners warn that if land is 
bought and sold, an exploitative landlord class will be created. 
Gorbachev has declared himself against the purchase and sale of land. 
The parliaments in the Russian Federation and the Baltic republics have already 
approved private ownership, however, and deputies said those republics would 
probably not agree to holding referendums on the question. 
Col. Victor Alksnis, a self-described "hawk" from Latvia, told reporters that 
those who observe how easily Gorbachev's proposals passed could be deceived 
into thinking that the Soviet president still enjoys massive support in the 
country. 
In fact, "what is happening at the Congress is starkly different from what is 
happening outside," Alksnis said. "Whereas Mikhail Gorbachev's rating in the 
country as a whole stands at 20%, at the Congress he is, on the contrary, 
supported by 80%." 
Polls show that the Congress' attitude toward a new union treaty also differs 
greatly from that of the general public. A bare majority, 52.7% of people 
polled in 23 places around the Soviet Union by the Parliament's polling 
service, said they believe that the Soviet people "are so closely knitted 
together that no division is possible." 
Gorbachev's real test is expected to come today or Wednesday when the Congress 
is expected to vote on the president's proposal to expand his executive powers 
under a general reorganization of the government that would create a vice 
presidency and a small cabinet. 
Passage would require approval of two-thirds of the Congress' 2,250 members, 
when barely two-thirds have been showing up on typical days since the session 
began a week ago. 
Alksnis and the powerful Soyuz group of about 400 conservative deputies he 
represents raised another challenge to Gorbachev on Monday with a proposed 
resolution that the lawmakers be actively involved in formulating Soviet policy 
in the Persian Gulf from Jan. 5 through 14, the eve of the deadline for Iraqi 
President Saddam Hussein to withdraw his forces from Kuwait. 
"Any participation by the Soviet Union in military activities against Iraq is 
impermissible, because it contradicts the state interests of the Soviet Union," 
the draft resolution said. 
