HIGH STYLE: AROUND HOME; 
THE SCOOTER 
THE FIRST GENERATION of office computers -- with the keyboard integrated with 
the screen -- condemned office workers to an updated Dickensian servitude. For, 
as studies of clerical workers with carpal tunnel syndrome show, typing hour 
after hour at a desk-height keyboard, with wrists raised higher than the 
fingers, puts unnatural stress on the wrists. 
Lowering the keyboard below desk height, with wrists parallel to fingertips, 
alleviates the stress. One way to assume such a position is by resting the 
keyboard on your lap or thighs while leaning back, with your feet on the desk. 
But no one wants to maintain such a sprawling posture all day long; besides, in 
a workplace it doesn't look very businesslike. 
So some office furniture manufacturers offer articulated keyboard drawers that 
attach underneath the desk surface and slide out, thereby placing the keyboard 
just above the user's lap. But the keyboard drawer have disadvantages: In time 
they may become wobbly, and they hog critical knee space under the desk -- you 
can't cross your legs. 
To the rescue, in 1985, came office furniture maker Herman Miller's 
free-standing computer-keyboard Scooter, designed by Jack Kelley, who is based 
in Spring Lake, Mich. His Scooter is height- and tilt-adjustable and doubles as 
a stand for a dictionary or sewing machine, or even as a speaker's lectern. 
With the optional wire rack, it also functions as a music stand. When not in 
use, the lightweight Scooter "scoots" under the desk, out of sight. 
Interestingly, the Scooter lacks casters. Instead, Kelley opted for 
low-friction polyethylene pads that glide easily across a floor or carpet. "I 
wanted to keep the base low to the floor, so you won't kick or stumble over 
it," he says. 
"I've always specialized in responsive furniture that changes and accommodates 
to the user," says Kelley. For instance, in the mid-60s, he helped develop 
Herman Miller's Action Office, the world's first panel-based systems furniture 
(the kind we now see in large offices everywhere, made of easily reconfigured, 
different-height wall panels and various desk surfaces, shelves and storage 
compartments). For its part, the Scooter, says Kelley, is for the computer user 
"who doesn't want to be positioned in a sedentary posture, who wants to be able 
to stand up and sit down and swivel and walk around -- to be fully in control 
of his environment. I'm anti-everything that doesn't respond to the user's 
will." 
 About $280, retail, at Herman Miller Office Pavilion, 2575 McCabe Way, Irvine, 
(714) 975-8700, and Herman Miller Inc., Pacific Design Center, 8687 Melrose 
Avenue, Los Angeles, (213) 659-7600. 
