NHL ROUNDUP; 
THIS TIME, BRUINS' WIN IS BLOODLESS 
There was plenty of bad blood between the Hartford Whalers and Boston Bruins 
when they split back-to-back games in late November. 
After what the Whalers complained were cheap and vicious shots, the Bruins' Cam 
Neely was suspended five games for hitting defenseman Randy Ladoucer over the 
head with his stick. 
Apparently, the Whalers' harping on the numerous incidents only served to anger 
the Bruins. They were ready to play hockey Wednesday night at Hartford, Conn. 
Neely, refreshed by his enforced vacation, scored twice, and the Bruins 
dominated, 5-1, in a cleanly played game. 
There were only four minor penalties, and the only fight was after the game 
between Bob Sweeney of the Bruins and Mike Tomlak of the Whalers. Sweeney 
scored Boston's final goal in the second period on a penalty shot. 
Neely, getting a quick measure of revenge, opened the scoring 25 seconds after 
the opening faceoff. Ladoucer blocked Neely's first shot, but Craig Janney 
retrieved the puck and passed to Neely for the score. 
Andy Moog stopped 23 shots, but lost his shutout in the second period when Ed 
Kastelic scored. 
With the Montreal Canadiens losing, the Bruins raised their lead in the Adams 
Division to three points. 
Toronto 4, Montreal 1 -- Vince Damphousse broke a second-period tie with a 
power-play goal, and the Maple Leafs won a home game for the first time in a 
month. 
The way the fans were chanting "Go, Habs, Go," it appeared that many in the 
sellout of 16,382 were rooting for the Canadiens. 
Mike Keane opened the scoring for the Canadiens, seeking their fourth victory 
in a row. 
But the Maple Leafs dominated the rest of the game for their eighth victory in 
33 games. 
Edmonton 5, Vancouver 4 -- The Oilers are slowly developing a contender. With 
Joe Murphy scoring a goal and assisting on three others, the Oilers built a big 
lead at Edmonton and barely lasted. 
The victory moved the Oilers, who had been deep in the cellar after their slow 
start, into fifth place in the Smythe Division. DAN HAFNER 
