ONLY IN L.A. / PEOPLE AND EVENTS 
When the first annual Police and Fire Invitational Shoot-Out was scheduled, it 
seemed a bit unfair to have law enforcement types competing against personnel 
who stamp out blazes for a living. 
Then again, maybe not. Overall winner of the trap and skeet shoot-out in 
Redlands was the Long Beach Fire Department. 
We don't know if that makes us feel good about the Fire Department or nervous 
about the police. 
Another contribution of the L.A. car culture: Owners of expensive jalopies can 
now install in their garages hydraulic platforms that will lift their treasures 
12 feet off the ground, presumably putting them out of reach of thieves. 
The inventor, Car Stacker West of Redondo Beach, charges about $4,500 to put 
one car in the air and about $8,500 for a double lift job. 
Think of the possibilities: With the car on the rack, you could change your own 
oil or rent a grease monkey. 
And you could brag about your new architectural style: Mark C. Bloome Moderne. 
Considering the purpose of the form, you can't really blame Wolcott's 
stationery store downtown for posting this announcement on its counter: 
"No bankruptcy kits sent out C.O.D. (cash on delivery) -- except to law firms." 
When we reported Friday that some local history buffs have formed the Millard 
Fillmore Bicentennial Commission to prepare for the 13th President's 200th 
birthday on Jan. 7, 2000, you might have been tempted to ask: 
But why should I care about Millard? 
Well, it was Fillmore who signed the bill admitting California as the 31st 
state on Sept. 9, 1850. There was, however, no celebration that day in L.A., 
which was then a dusty pueblo teeming with about 1,800 people (the exact count 
on any day depending on how many people had been killed at the gaming tables 
the previous night). 
In fact, news of statehood didn't reach L.A. for weeks because the town had no 
telegraph, railroad or fax machines. 
Talk about ingratitude: L.A. nearly left the state in the mid-1850s, writes 
author Midge Sherwood in her recently published "Days of Vintage, Years of 
Vision." 
At the urging of the southern counties, who felt they paid an unfair burden of 
the taxes, a bill was introduced into the state Assembly that would have 
divided California into three states: Shasta (the northern portion), California 
(the central), and Colorado (the southern, including L.A.). 
The bill was approved by the Assembly but died in the state Senate. Had it 
passed, USC would be the University of Central Colorado today. An oft-used 
expression would be: "It never rains in Colorado. . . ." And singer John Denver 
no doubt would have been inspired to write "San Gabriel Mountain High." 
Did anyone get the license number of that mattress? 
Sonia Duran of Long Beach was directing traffic while her company's float -- a 
bed -- was being wheeled into position for the funky Belmont Shore Christmas 
Parade. But someone lost control of the bed and it crashed into her, spraining 
her ankle. 
Said Duran: "My doctor told me, 'I've heard about people falling out of bed, 
but never someone getting run over by a bed.' " 
Did anyone get the license number of that fireball? 
Still no word on the identity of the large, greenish mass that flashed across 
the sky Thursday night and prompted hundreds of calls from residents and 
pilots. 
It wasn't a missing aircraft, said Federal Aviation Administration officials. 
It wasn't a spacecraft, the North American Air Defense Space Command said. 
It wasn't indigestion, doctors interviewed by The Times agreed. 
Whatever, museum guide Rick de la Cruz of the Griffith Park Observatory didn't 
seem worried about this ambiguous omen for the new decade. He said the 
phenomenon prompted about 10 calls. 
An unusual number? 
"We get hundreds of calls more about our Laserium shows," he added. 
KNX radio's Tom Sirmons predicts that the complaint of the '90s mother to her 
grown children will be: 
"You don't write, you don't call, you don't fax. . . ." 
