VENTURA COUNTY NEWS ROUNDUP: SANTA PAULA; 
CITY TO JOIN STUDY ON PIPELINE PROPOSAL 
The Santa Paula City Council has approved spending $31,500 to participate in a 
joint environmental study of a proposed pipeline that would import Northern 
California water to portions of Ventura County. 
The study, which will take nearly a year to complete, is being conducted by 
area cities considering tapping into the state water system for relief from the 
drought. 
The council acted Monday. 
The pipeline would bring water to Santa Paula on its way to Ventura and would 
improve both the quantity and quality of water now available, said Norm 
Wilkinson, city public works director. Importing state water would slow the 
depletion of ground-water reserves, which are already 30 feet below normal 
levels, he said. 
Imported water could also be mixed with the ground water to improve its 
quality, officials said. Ground water in the area has a high concentration of 
sulfates. 
Santa Paula's share of the annual operating costs of such a pipeline would be 
$1 million to $2 million, water authorities said. That would include the 
capital costs of the pipeline, water treatment facilities and cost of the water 
itself. 
Carl Barringer, a former City Council member, said the city probably would fund 
the project with a bond issue. 
Frederick J. Gientke, United Water Conservation District general manager, said 
it would take from five to 10 years before the pipeline could actually be built 
because of needed environmental reviews and government approvals. 
The study will examine where the pipeline would begin and whether the water 
would be treated at its source or the destination, Wilkinson said. It will also 
examine other sources of water supply, from icebergs to reclamation, he said. 
"We need to stay involved in the process," Wilkinson said. "Once we get some 
questions answered, we will have a better picture of what the project can and 
will do. Then we can decide whether or not to participate," Wilkinson said. 
AMELIA CHAFFEE 
