CAMARENA INDICTMENT NAMES BUSINESS FIGURE; 
NARCOTICS: RUBEN ZUNO ARCE IS THE 16TH PERSON TO BE CHARGED IN THE 
KIDNAP-MURDER OF THE U.S. DRUG AGENT. HE IS A BROTHER-IN-LAW OF A FORMER 
PRESIDENT OF MEXICO. 
A federal grand jury in Los Angeles indicted a prominent Mexican businessman on 
charges that he played a key role in arranging the February, 1985, kidnaping 
and murder of U.S. drug agent Enrique Camarena, U.S. Atty. Robert Brosio 
announced Monday. 
Ruben Zuno Arce, 59, brother-in-law of former Mexican President Luis 
Echeverria, was specifically accused, along with four others, of having 
"organized and put into operation a scheme to kidnap and murder" Camarena. He 
was accused of having participated in a meeting with the four other men in the 
first week of February, 1985, to discuss "the kidnaping and interrogation" of 
Camarena. 
The indictment asserts that Zuno and the others participated in the plot to 
murder Camarena "for the purpose of maintaining and increasing" their 
trafficking in marijuana and cocaine. The indictment refers to Zuno as being 
part of the "Guadalajara narcotics cartel." 
If convicted, Zuno faces a life term on each of the four counts lodged against 
him, according to Assistant U.S. Atty. Manuel Medrano. 
Zuno became the 16th person indicted in the case, the most celebrated murder of 
any DEA agent in U.S. history. A DEA agent who has been working on the case 
since the murder said the investigation is continuing. "You can be sure of 
that," said the agent, who spoke on condition that he not be identified. 
Zuno pleaded not guilty Monday when he was arraigned before U.S. District Judge 
Edward Rafeedie. In a loud and clear voice, Zuno proclaimed, through an 
interpreter, that he was "not guilty" and "absolutely innocent" to each of the 
four federal charges lodged against him. 
The charges are conspiracy to knowingly and intentionally kidnap, torture, 
interrogate and murder Camarena; aiding and abetting in the kidnaping and 
murder of Camarena; conspiring to kidnap an individual on account of the 
performance of his official duties, and kidnaping an individual because of his 
official duties. 
In addition to Zuno the four others charged with plotting Camarena's death are 
Rafael Caro Quintero, Ernesto Fonseca Carrillo, Javier Barba Hernandez and Juan 
Gilberto Hernandez Parra. Caro Quintero and Fonseca Carrillo are in custody in 
Mexico City on separate charges filed by Mexican authorities in the Camarena 
murder. Hernandez Parra was decribed in the indictment as an agent of the 
Mexican Federal Judicial Police. 
All five are alleged to be members of the Guadalajara drug cartel. 
Zuno was arrested Saturday night at Los Angeles International Airport when he 
arrived in the United States for a scheduled hearing on other federal charges 
pending against him. He and his lawyers appeared to be stunned by the new 
charges, but declined comment beyond the not-guilty plea. 
Judge Rafeedie ordered Zuno held without bail, despite the pleas of his defense 
lawyer, Edward Medvene, that his client was neither a flight risk nor a threat 
to the community. He had been free on $200,000 bail on federal perjury charges 
and has twice returned to the United States from Mexico for hearings on that 
case. 
Prosecutor Medrano asserted that Zuno might flee, that he represented a threat 
to witnesses who would testify at his trial and that the charges against him 
were of sufficient gravity to deny him bail. "The complexion of this case is 
night and day different from the perjury case," Medrano said. 
Zuno surfaced as a potentially important figure in the Camarena case in August 
when immigration authorities in San Antonio arrested him as a suspected drug 
trafficker and brought him to Los Angeles for questioning as a material witness 
in the ongoing investigation into Camarena's murder. He denied any involvement 
in the murder. 
He was held without bail for nearly two months by a variety of federal 
agencies, during which time he testified before a grand jury under a grant of 
immunity. 
On Sept. 7, he was charged with perjuring himself before the grand jury on two 
occasions. That indictment states that Zuno lied when he denied knowing Rafael 
Caro Quintero and Ernesto Fonseca Carrillo. A trial on the perjury charges is 
scheduled to begin in January before U.S. District Judge Robert Takasugi. 
Monday marked the first time that federal authorities alleged that Zuno was 
directly involved in Camarena's murder. 
"The charges against Zuno go to the heart of this case," prosecutor Medrano 
told Judge Rafeedie. He noted that Zuno has been charged with plotting the 
murder with Caro Quintero and Fonseca Carrillo. "This man rises to that level 
of (drug) trafficker," Medrano asserted. At another point, Medrano asserted 
that Zuno had been "part and parcel of the entire planning stage" of the 
Camarena kidnaping and murder. 
Zuno is a member of an influential Mexican family. His father was governor of 
the state of Jalisco, and his sister is married to Echeverria. 
Zuno, his attorneys and his wife have consistently denied that he has had any 
involvement with drug trafficking. Rather, they say he is a wealthy businessman 
with interests in ranching, oil and canning, among other enterprises. 
Camarena was tortured in a Guadalajara house purchased by Caro Quintero in 
January, 1985, less than a month before the murder. 
According to court documents filed in San Antonio in August, Zuno owned the 
home until Jan. 11, 1985, when he sold it to another man who, in turn, sold it 
to Caro Quintero. 
In all, 16 men have been indicted in Los Angeles in connection with the 
Camarena murder. Three of them were convicted in a trial held before Judge 
Rafeedie last year. Raul Lopez Alvarez, a former homicide officer for the 
Mexican Federal Judicial Police, was sentenced to 240 years in prison; Rene 
Martin Verdugo Urquidez, a San Felipe land developer, was sentenced to 240 
years and an additional life term; and Jesus Felix Gutierrez, former owner of a 
Los Angeles area seafood company, was sentenced to 10 years. 
Eight of the remaining 13 indicted in the case are fugitives, according to 
prosecutors. Among them are Caro Quintero and Fonseca Carrillo. The Mexican 
government has refused U.S. requests to extradite them to this country. 
Other defendants include Armando Pavon Reyes, a former commander of the Mexican 
Federal Judicial Police who originally headed the Mexican government 
investigation into the Camarena murder, and Sergio Espino Verdin, a police 
officer identified by U.S. officials as one of Camarena's interrogators. Pavon 
Reyes and Ines Calderone Quintero are fugitives. 
Juan Jose Bernabe Ramirez, a former Mexican police officer arrested earlier 
this year, is scheduled to go on trial in February for his alleged role in the 
murder. 
Camarena's pilot, Alfredo Zavala Avelar, also was kidnaped and murdered. 
Indictments have been lodged against some of the 16 defendants for their role 
in that killing, but Zuno was not named in those charges. 
Later in the day Monday, Judge Takasugi denied motions filed by Zuno's lawyers 
that the perjury charges be dropped on grounds of prosecutorial misconduct. The 
lawyers also objected to the fact that a briefcase belonging to Zuno was seized 
when he was arrested at Los Angeles International Airport Saturday night. 
They asserted that confidential materials were photocopied by government 
agents. Assistant U.S. Atty. Adam Schiff denied that charge. 
