MICROWAVE: THE CARE AND ROASTING OF THE CORNISH HEN 
There are a couple of points to bear in mind: Never salt the hens until after 
they're cooked, because they may toughen and dry. And unless the hens are 
accompanied by a cover-up sauce, you'll need to brush them with a browning 
glaze. 
ROAST CORNISH HENS 
WITH MUSHROOM- 
BULGUR PILAF 
1 cup coarsely chopped mushrooms 
2 tablespoons butter or margarine 
1 cup bulgur 
1 3/4 cups chicken broth 
1 teaspoon salt 
1/8 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 
1/3 cup coarsely chopped pecans 
2 (1 1/2- to 2-pound) Cornish hens 
3 tablespoons liquid gravy browner mixed with 3 tablespoons water 
Place mushrooms in butter in paper-towel-covered, microwave-safe 2 1/2-quart 
casserole. Microwave on HIGH (100% power) 2 minutes. Add bulgur and broth. 
Cover with casserole lid and microwave on HIGH 4 to 6 minutes until small 
bubbles appear at edge of casserole. 
Stir lightly, re-cover and microwave on MEDIUM (50% power) 9 to 10 minutes, 
without stirring, until almost all liquid is absorbed. Let stand, covered, 5 
minutes. Mix in salt, pepper and pecans. 
Loosely stuff body cavities of hens, allowing 1/3 cup stuffing for each, then 
skewer openings shut. Place remaining stuffing in lightly buttered 6-cup 
casserole. Cover with foil and set in conventional oven set at 300 degrees. 
Arrange hens, breast-side up, at least 1 inch apart in microwave-safe 
bake/roast pan with drumsticks toward center. Brush each bird with gravy 
browner glaze. Microwave hens, uncovered, on HIGH, allowing 6 to 8 minutes per 
pound (combined weight). When legs move easily in hip sockets and juices run 
clear, hens are done. 
Brush hens again with browning glaze, then let stand, uncovered, 5 minutes 
before serving. Accompany with remaining stuffing. Makes 4 servings. 
CORNISH HENS 
WITH BLACK 
CHERRY SAUCE 
2 (1 1/2- to 1 3/4-pound) Cornish hens, halved lengthwise and wing tips removed 
2 tablespoons butter or margarine 
1/2 teaspoon salt 
1 (1-pound, 1-ounce) can pitted dark sweet cherries, undrained 
1 teaspoon lemon juice 
2 tablespoons cornstarch blended with 2 tablespoons cold water 
2 tablespoons dry Port or Madeira wine 
Dash black pepper 
Brown hens, skin-side down, 2 minutes in 2 batches in heated butter in large 
skillet on top of stove over medium-high heat. Transfer to microwave-safe 
11x8x2-inch casserole, arranging skin-side-up, with meatiest parts toward 
outside. 
Cover with wax paper and microwave on HIGH (100% power) 15 to 20 minutes, 
rearranging at half time, until hens are tender. When legs move easily in hip 
sockets and juices run clear, hens are done. With slotted spoon, lift hens to 
heated serving dish and sprinkle with salt. Cover with foil and let stand while 
making sauce. 
Skim fat from casserole. Strain liquid through fine sieve and reserve. Drain 
cherry liquid into microwave-safe 2-cup measure and add enough reserved liquid 
to total 1 1/4 cups. 
Stir in lemon juice and cornstarch paste. Microwave, uncovered, on HIGH 3 to 3 
1/2 minutes, whisking at half time, until sauce boils and thickens. Stir in 
wine, pepper and cherries and microwave, uncovered, on HIGH 1 minute. Spoon 
some of sauce over birds and pass rest separately. Makes 4 servings. 
