WOUNDED SALVATION ARMY WORKER DIES 
A 61-year-old Salvation Army supervisor who was accidentally shot in the head 
with a gun left in a bag of donations has died, and El Cajon police said they 
will go through receipts given out by workers in an effort to determine who 
might have dropped off the pistol. 
James Irwin Brower, 61, of Alpine died Tuesday evening at UC San Diego Medical 
Center, several hours after being shot by co-worker Connie (C. W.) Wayne 
Overby, 51. 
Overby was looking at the gun at a Salvation Army collection center after 
picking it up off the ground, where it had fallen from donated goods. He 
accidentally discharged it, firing one round and hitting Brower in the head, 
police said. 
Police Lt. Bob Lein said the results of his department's investigation will be 
turned over to the San Diego County district attorney's office, which will 
determine whether any charges, such as negligence, will be filed against 
Overby. The Police Department is "not actively pursuing criminal charges," he 
said. 
Investigators believe the pistol, a .22-caliber Derringer that holds two 
rounds, was either dropped by someone or fell out of a bag of donated items at 
the center operated by Brower and Overby. The two men received clothes, 
appliances and furniture at the back of a trailer in the parking lot of 
Kaelin's Market on Main Street. 
"The gun was not turned in as a separate item," Lein said. "The person (who 
left the gun) did not tell them or did not know to tell them that the gun was 
among the property being dropped off." 
Police will also seek to find the owner of the gun through its registration. 
Russ Russell, director of community relations with the Salvation Army in San 
Diego County, said organization officials are reviewing their policy involving 
donations. He said the group does not accept firearms and that, had the men 
known the gun was being donated, they would not have accepted it. 
The incident is a first for the group, Russell said. He said it is being 
reviewed in an attempt to assure that nothing like it happens again. 
All employees and volunteers are being asked to be careful when receiving 
anything in a bag or box, he said. 
"I can't imagine it happening again, and I pray to God it doesn't happen 
again," Russell said. "It is just something you don't expect to happen, but 
again, we are going to take every precaution and inform our employees and 
volunteers to be very careful." 
Brower had worked for the Salvation Army for several years. 
