A NEW WAY TO SPEND AT MALL -- PAY TICKETS 
Aren't malls the coolest? You can shop at the mall, eat at the mall, bank at 
the mall and, best of all, hang out at the mall. And starting next month, 
you'll be able to pay off traffic tickets there. 
At a ribbon-cutting ceremony Wednesday, mall and Traffic Court officials marked 
the imminent opening of the Baldwin Hills Crenshaw Plaza traffic ticket payment 
office -- next to Sears. 
The office, scheduled to open Jan. 16, will house computer operators who will 
be equipped to accept payment of fines, schedule court appointments and 
register violators in traffic school. 
Fines can still be paid through the mail, said Municipal Presiding Judge Larry 
Fidler. But for those who prefer to do business in person, the office will be 
open from 10 a.m. to 7 p.m. Monday through Friday. 
The Baldwin Hills facility joins two other ticket payment centers run by the 
county. Fidler said an office in Westchester, which opened in December, 1985, 
and a West Valley branch, which opened in the spring, have been running 
smoothly. Each averages about 6,000 customers a month, he added. 
Fidler said that according to customer surveys, the typical visitor to the 
offices waits fewer than five minutes for service. 
Officials anticipate that the Baldwin Hills office will funnel away some of the 
people who crowd the downtown Traffic Courthouse, said Annette Waller, Traffic 
Court division chief. On an average day, payment of 2,500 fines are processed 
there, she said. 
Mall shoppers passing by the ribbon-cutting ceremony predicted that the payment 
office will prove a welcome alternative to going downtown. 
Andrea Kiongozi, 29, a construction company dispatcher who lives in Baldwin 
Hills, said driving downtown, parking and waiting for a court assignment were 
the biggest inconveniences she went through when she received a ticket 
recently. 
"I went to the courthouse on my lunch hour, hoping it wouldn't take too long," 
Kiongozi said. "I wound up taking half a day off from work." 
