WE SWATTED A GNAT AND STIRRED A HORNET'S NEST; 
LATIN AMERICA: THE NEXT GENERATION OF U.S. POLICY PROBLEMS WILL ARISE IN THIS 
HEMISPHERE. WE'VE NEEDLESSLY COMPLICATED THEM BY USING A MILITARY INVASION TO 
SETTLE A SCORE. 
Whatever happens next in Panama, last week's U.S. invasion surely marks the end 
of an era in hemisphere relations. The Latin American future for the United 
States holds only challenges for which this nation and its leaders are 
unprepared -- economically, politically or morally. 
U.S. military action to depose Gen. Manuel A. Noriega and to break the power of 
his Panamanian Defense Forces is understandably popular with the American 
people. Beyond Noriega's perversion of his country's political process, he had 
become a symbol of U.S. impotence in dealing with the drug problem. His status 
as a drug trafficker was deliberately inflated by the Reagan Administration, 
which was eager to gain a victory in the drug war it was losing at home. 
Instead, what ensued was national frustration when Noriega refused to play his 
role of vanquished villain. 
Noriega's significance as a symbol could be seen in Americans' escalating 
anxiety over his evading capture by U.S. forces last week, even though his 
reign and his role in the U.S. drug scene, never more than minor, had ended. 
At the level of symbol, Noriega's departure should finish illusions that the 
key to dealing with our drug problem lies abroad rather than at home. At the 
level of substance, this is likely the last time that U.S. military 
intervention will be efficacious in resolving even a temporary problem in this 
hemisphere. 
Now the hard part begins, even assuming both a rapid end to Panama's domestic 
chaos and unprecedented success in nurturing democracy from feeble roots. 
Panama is unique. It has no left-wing "liberation" movement or right-wing 
"death squads"; neither Fidel Castro nor Daniel Ortega has a foothold there; 
and the United States has had presence aplenty, providing both intelligence 
before invasion and the logistics for carrying it out. Nowhere else in the 
hemisphere -- barring a Grenada-like crisis in another tiny island-state -- 
will these conditions exist. Nowhere else, including El Salvador and Nicaragua, 
can the United States expect to use military force in a short, sharp shock to 
topple a regime and immobilize local military resistance. The actions dictated 
by the Bush Administration last week definitely will exact a price. 
Ronald Reagan had fallen into the trap of having his confrontations portrayed 
by Noriega as "gringos vs. Latinos." George Bush avoided that manipulation when 
he responded to Noriega's outrages after Panama's presidential election last 
May. By pressing the issue upon the Organization of American States, Bush 
changed the theme to "democrats vs. dictators." Soon, however, White House 
frustration overwhelmed the effort to teach a valuable lesson to Latin American 
states: that they must help police the region against undesirables. 
Today, many Latin Americans are having it both ways: They are rid of Noriega, 
but they have had to take no responsibility for acting. In fact, they have the 
added luxury of criticizing the United States -- although, in some fledgling 
democracies, vulnerable leaders must do this to lessen the taint of ties to 
Washington. 
Satisfaction here over last week's bold action poses a further risk: that we 
will put off, once again, coming to terms with Latin America's future. Yet it 
has already become clear that "solving" the Panama problem will require a 
continuing U.S. engagement and a good deal of cold cash. And the size of the 
broader regional challenge is daily demonstrated by the pressure of people 
trying to cross the U.S. border. This time Latin America will not be pushed 
aside. 
Like it or not, the United States must secure a broad range of support from the 
Latin countries in an age when the demand for economic progress and political 
growth will far outstrip the supply. And that will begin to happen only when 
the U.S. government learns three things: patience, forbearance and greater 
respect for the forms of hemispheric relations. This means perseverance in 
keeping regional states on the hook (Panama), supporting rather than stifling 
efforts like the so-called Contadora process concerning Nicaragua, and seeking 
the moral high ground whenever possible, even at the price of delay. 
It is ironic that the end of the Cold War is not providing respite but 
revealing a potentially deeper struggle on our own doorstep. Dealing with it 
will demand a commitment of time, attention and resources that most Americans 
will find odious. It will demand massive investment -- first in U.S. society 
and then in neighboring states -- which is mocked by the pledge of "no new 
taxes." These facts may be incompatible with current celebration; but they set 
immutable requirements for the future. 
