CRUISE VIEWS: HOW SHIPS SCORE IN SANITATION RATING SYSTEM 
Tom Hunt believes he is a lot safer eating on board a cruise ship than in a 
restaurant. 
The Miami-based Hunt, who is chief of the vessel sanitation program for the 
U.S. Public Health Service, is head of a six-man team that inspects and grades 
the kitchens, water systems and food storage areas of cruise ships. 
"I've inspected a lot of land-based restaurants over the years," said Hunt, who 
began his career as a restaurant inspector in Salt Lake City. "If I would 
compare our worst ship to any land-based restaurant, our ships are better." 
The findings of Hunt's team are published in a mailing popularly called "the 
green sheet," which is sent to travel agents, newspapers, magazines and 
cruise-industry personnel every two weeks. 
What they are checking on cruise ships, according to Hunt, is first and most 
important the safety of the water supply; second, how long food is held at 
certain temperatures that could be unsafe, such as on decks and at midnight 
buffets. 
"If the ship's staff throws the food out there and it sits at room temperature 
for three or four hours, there's going to be a disaster," Hunt said. 
Hunt, who took over the ship inspection post in February, 1989, has helped 
initiate a new scoring system to replace the one that rated vessels only 
"satisfactory" or "unsatisfactory," depending on whether they received more or 
less than 86 points on a scale of 100. 
Now the actual numerical grades are published. Hunt thinks the change makes 
cruise lines much more sensitive to their scores than they were under the 
previous system. 
"An 84 and a 30 are both failing, but in different degrees," he said. As for 
those that pass: "It's no longer sufficient for them to get an 86. They want a 
90-plus." 
For the first time ever, two ships have scored 100 on 1990 inspections -- 
Carnival Cruise Lines' Fantasy on its inspection of April 30, coming up from an 
initial failing grade of 78, and Windstar Cruises' Wind Spirit on its Aug. 27 
inspection. 
The Wind Spirit's earlier ratings were 94 and 88, both passing. On a subsequent 
inspection Aug. 24, Fantasy slipped back to an 88. 
The ratio of passing and failing has changed dramatically since the numerical 
system and a new, easier-to-understand manual were introduced. 
In addition, Hunt's emphasis on education and his new series of training 
classes to teach kitchen supervisors and chefs about food handling and water 
treatment -- in effect telling them not only what the Public Health Service 
wants but why it wants it -- have made a discernable improvement in ship 
sanitation. 
On the Oct. 28, 1988, report, 43 ships passed and 36 failed. A year later, 64 
passed and 24 failed. 
The most recent report -- Oct. 26, 1990 -- shows that 83 passed and 18 failed. 
(The total number on each report vary, depending on how many ships are in 
service and how many have been inspected.) 
Hunt and his team performed 200 ship inspections in 1989 and will do about 255 
by the end of 1990. In 1988, under the old system, about 130 ships were 
inspected. 
The current failing ships and their scores, from low to high, are: 
Vistamar, 30; Odysseus, 50; Berlin, 56; Pride of Mississippi, 57; Vasco de Gama 
(not in service at the present time), 58; Pegasus, 62; Polaris, 66; Society 
Explorer, 66; Ocean Spirit (not in service), 68; Fair Princess, 76; Crystal 
Harmony, 77; Cunard Countess, 78; Daphne, 78; New Shoreham II, 80; Seabourn 
Pride, 80; Britanis, 82; EugenioCosta, 83, and Scandinavian Sun, 83. 
The highest scorers on the current green sheet are: 
Wind Spirit, 100; Royal Viking Star, 99; Americana, 98; Amerikanis, 97; Crown 
Odyssey, 97; Royal Viking Sky, 97; Starship Oceanic, 97; Holiday, 96; Song of 
America, 96; Vistafjord, 96; Sagafjord, 95; Sea Goddess I, 95; Azure Seas, 94; 
Seabourn Spirit, 94, and Seaward 94. 
The foreign-flag ships now understand what the Public Health Service wants, 
according to Hunt. "That's the key, since we're judging them consistently each 
time. We want each inspector to come in with the same criteria." 
One story from earlier days, perhaps true, Hunt said, is about an inspector who 
came aboard a ship and demanded that the ice machine be moved across the room 
from one spot to another, which the bewildered staff did. On the next 
inspection a year or so later, another inspector took one look at the ice 
machine and ordered it moved back to where it had been originally. 
"So we've put out a good manual," Hunt said. "When the inspectors go on board, 
we not only tell them this is wrong, but why it's wrong." Hunt believes 
education is one of the most important aspects of his job. 
The ships that Hunt inspects carry 13 passengers or more and have an 
international itinerary. This includes excursion-type ships with one-day 
sailings outside U.S. waters so passengers can gamble -- vessels such as the 
Viking Princess and the SeaEscape ships that sail from Florida. 
It does not, however, include U.S. flag ships that do not leave U.S. waters, 
such as the Delta Queen and Mississippi Queen paddle-wheelers, which sail the 
Mississippi River, and American Hawaii's two cruise ships that sail entirely 
within Hawaii. Inspections of these ships are the responsibility of the states 
they sail in and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 
Hunt and his team also do construction inspections on new vessels in the 
shipyards, financed by the yards and cruise companies "because they really want 
to know so they can take care of any problems at the yard before the ship sails 
for the first time." 
Periodic health inspections on ships are paid for by the cruise lines as well. 
The Centers for Disease Control inspects ships only in U.S. ports, such as 
Miami, Fort Lauderdale, Port Canaveral, Key West, New York City, St. Thomas, 
San Juan, New Orleans, Galveston, San Diego, Los Angeles and several ports in 
Alaska. 
Hunt was recently in Guam for the first time, making a construction inspection 
follow-up on Salen Lindblad's new Frontier Spirit before its maiden voyage. 
"Normally I wouldn't come to Guam," Hunt said, "but the vessel will not be 
inspected in the United States prior to its first dry dock, and they wanted to 
be able to make any necessary changes then before their first grade score." 
The cruise lines have been completely cooperative, Hunt said, despite the fact 
that the Public Health Service has no legislative authority to implement 
sanctions against foreign-flag vessels. 
"I'm just making recommendations," Hunt said. "I can't keep a ship from 
sailing." 
At the same time, he emphasized, cruise lines are all too aware of the 
publicity that major outbreaks of food- or water-borne illnesses on a cruise 
ship would get, especially if 300 to 400 people got sick. 
"Cruise lines want their passengers to have a good experience and to come back 
again," Hunt said, "so they pay attention to their scores." 
Potential passengers should understand that a failing grade does not mean a 
diarrheal outbreak is impending, nor does a passing score mean a traveler can 
suspend normal precautions with impunity. The grades only indicate the 
condition of the vessel on the date of inspection. 
Detailed inspection reports on individual vessels will be sent free on request. 
Write Chief, Vessel Sanitation Program, Center for Environmental Health and 
Injury Control, 1015 North America Way, Room 107, Miami, Fla. 33132. 
