POLITICAL SCRAMBLE EXPECTED OVER 7 NEW HOUSE SEATS 
California soon will reap a rich political bounty because of the 1990 census, 
but there is no particular joy in either Washington or Sacramento as leaders 
ponder the torturous process they face in carving the state into 52 new 
congressional fiefdoms. 
Under the census figures, the Golden State will gain seven seats in the U.S. 
House of Representatives and in 1992 will elect 52 members to the House -- more 
than any state has ever had and about 12% of the entire House membership of 
435. 
"This is going to be an ugly, ugly year," one legislative consultant in 
Sacramento said Thursday as he contemplated the political bloodletting that 
could accompany the decennial process of allocating congressional seats on the 
basis of new U.S. Census figures. 
Five of the seven new seats will go to Southern California, largely because of 
growth in predominantly Republican suburban areas. The two Northern California 
districts will be needed to accommodate a soaring population in the San Joaquin 
Valley, around Sacramento and in the new suburban communities fanning out east 
of San Francisco Bay. 
At the outset, Democrats will be fully in command of the political pie-cutting 
since the Nov. 6 election results gave them increased control of the Senate and 
Assembly, which are empowered to draft both legislative and congressional 
reapportionment bills. The Democrats rule the present 45-seat California 
congressional delegation by 28 to 17. 
But standing in the way will be Republican Gov.-elect Pete Wilson, who takes 
office Jan. 7 and has vowed to veto any reapportionment bill that does not 
offer Republicans fair representation within the California House delegation. 
The situation is complicated by Proposition 140, the new state term-limits law 
that cuts off the careers of all present state lawmakers in either six or eight 
years and eliminates their lucrative retirement plans. With no future for them 
in Sacramento, ambitious legislators are beginning to covet congressional seats 
as never before. 
"I think there will be some long knives out for the new congressional 
districts," said the Sacramento consultant, who asked not to be identified. 
In the past, the state Legislature tended to defer to California's 
congressional leadership in drawing new House district lines. The late Rep. 
Phillip Burton (D-San Francisco) almost single-handedly drew the present 45 
districts with a primary goal of crafting politically safe seats for incumbents 
and, in one notorious case, creating a district tailor-made for his brother, 
John, stretching across San Francisco Bay to do so. 
With Phil Burton's death, the job will pass to Reps. Vic Fazio (D-Sacramento) 
and Howard Berman (D-Los Angeles), working with Reps. Duncan Hunter 
(R-Coronado) and John Doolittle (R-Citrus Heights). In a telephone interview 
from Washington on Thursday, Fazio said Phil Burton was guilty of "a little 
overkill" in fashioning the 1980s congressional districting plan, but that it 
does not favor Democrats as much as many Republicans contend. 
Still, Fazio promised "a different approach and style this time, with more 
public involvement and nowhere near as much influence by any one individual, 
more public hearings and probably far more attention given to county and city 
lines." 
But Fazio and his colleagues will have to deal with a corps of state lawmakers 
who have an eye on Washington and will try to influence the reapportionment 
process so that the new congressional districts are built around centers of 
their own political strength. 
"There's no question that some may want to draw lines for themselves," Fazio 
said. 
If an influential legislator does not have a new congressional district 
available, that legislator might work to alter an existing district to make it 
favorable to his own Washington ambitions. Such ambitions are likely to pit not 
only Democratic state legislators against some incumbent Republican members of 
Congress, but also Democrats against Democrats. 
The allocation of congressional seats has been a contentious and inherently 
political process ever since the beginning of the republic. 
Until 1842, many states avoided drawing congressional district lines by 
electing House members at large. But Congress decided this practice violated 
the Constitution's intent of having House members directly and frequently 
accountable to the people in local regions. 
For more than 150 years, Congress avoided dispute merely by increasing the size 
of the House of Representatives to accommodate growth and shifting populations, 
from 65 seats in 1789 to 435 in 1910. The final size of the House was not 
established by law at 435 until 1929. The nation went from 1910 until the early 
1930s without any reapportionment because of the ongoing dispute over the size 
of House membership. As a result, the California delegation soared in the early 
1930s by nine seats -- the most ever -- from 11 to 20. 
The traditional practice in redistricting is for the state party in power to 
draw district lines that maximize the party's voting clout, usually by dividing 
heavy concentrations of its own party members into separate districts. 
Over time, federal laws and court rulings have sharply curbed the ability of 
states to draw lines purely for political advantage. The primary constraint is 
that all districts must contain a similar population with a variance of no more 
than 1% or 2% from district to district. In California, the new districts 
should have an average of about 574,000 residents. With the use of computer-fed 
data from individual census tracts it is possible to draw districts that do not 
vary by more than a few residents. 
Compactness also is a criteria. Where possible, entire counties, neighboring 
cities or other recognized communities of interest are supposed to be lumped 
into the same district. 
Stretching districts over vast distances to bring in favorable voting groups is 
known as "gerrymandering." In 1812, artist Gilbert Stuart whimsically drew a 
head, tail and wings on the map of a Massachusetts district and declared, "That 
will do for a salamander." Observing this, editor Benjamin Russell added, 
"Better say a Gerrymander," after then-Massachusetts Gov. Elbridge Gerry. 
Fazio said he and Berman would strive for more geographical compactness in 
1991. Neat district lines are not always possible, Fazio said, but he added, "I 
think there will be less creativity this time." 
Another critical factor controlling redistricting is federal voting-rights 
legislation that prohibits any plan that dilutes minority representation. This 
poses a special problem for Democrats who, in the past, have sought to maximize 
the political support of Democratic-leaning minority groups by dividing their 
numbers into separate districts. But clustering large numbers of Latinos, for 
example, into one district will not necessarily guarantee a Latino seat since 
many residents may not be eligible to vote or may not be registered, Fazio 
said. 
The allocation of seven new seats to California, and the Prop. 140 pressures on 
state legislators to seek longevity in Congress, are not the only factors 
likely to lead to a major shake-up in both the Legislature and California's 
House delegation in the 1990s. 
Election year 1992 will be the last chance for veteran members of the House to 
retire and keep their campaign treasuries as personal income, an incentive to 
retire after the current term. And both California seats in the U.S. Senate 
will be up in the 1992 election. The prospect of a Senate seat already has 
lured at least two Democratic representatives, Bob Matsui of Sacramento and 
Barbara Boxer of Greenbrae. More House members -- Republicans as well as 
Democrats -- may join the race. They will have to relinquish their House seats 
to run for the Senate. The departure of any House member for whatever reason 
will ease the job of reapportionment drafters, eliminating the pressure to 
preserve a seat for an incumbent. 
Robert Naylor, the former Republican leader in the Assembly, has predicted, 
"There will be an unprecedented musical chairs-like scramble as members of both 
houses (Senate and Assembly) seek congressional seats, Assembly members seek 
the vacated Senate seats and some incumbents run against others because of 
dramatic shifts in district lines." 
Writing in the California Political Review, Naylor said the partisan effect of 
this will depend on the shape of the new districts. That, in turn, "will depend 
upon the effectiveness of Gov. Wilson in keeping legislative Republicans 
unified enough to strike a bargain for districts that are fair from a statewide 
partisan standpoint as opposed to benefitting incumbents." 
But Assembly Speaker Willie L. Brown Jr. (D-San Francisco) has said in 
interviews that the first order of business in drafting a redistricting plan is 
to satisfy as many incumbents of both parties as possible. By doing that, Brown 
might develop a consensus legislative bill that is insulated against a Wilson 
veto. 
CALIFORNIA CONGRESSIONAL REAPPORTIONMENT 
* What is it? Every 10 years, new U.S. Census figures are used to reapportion 
the 435 seats in the U.S. House of Representatives among the 50 states to 
reflect relative population gains or losses during the previous 10 years. Under 
the 1990 census, California will gain seven House seats, with its delegation 
increasing from 45 to 52, more than any state has ever had. 
* The next step: In 1991, it will be up to the California Legislature to draw 
new Congressional districts to reflect the new seats as well as population 
shifts among the existing 45 seats. Five of the new seats will be south of the 
Tehachapi Mountains and two will be in Northern California. Leaders of both the 
Republican and Democratic House delegations will discuss their desires with 
legislative leaders who will draft the reapportionment bills. The legislation, 
reflecting further census figures that are not expected to be available until 
July, probably will pass sometime in the fall. 
* What then? As with any legislation, the reapportionment bill will be sent by 
the Democratic-controlled Legislature to Republican Gov.-elect Pete Wilson, who 
takes office Jan. 6. Wilson has vowed to veto any measure that does not assure 
a fair balance of districts that are likely to be controlled by Republicans and 
Democrats, judged on the basis of current party registration in those areas. A 
compromise plan signed into law by Wilson would go into effect for the 1992 
elections. If there is a veto, the Legislature could override the governor and 
put the plan into effect with a two-thirds vote of each house. Otherwise, the 
Legislature would have to try to come up with another plan acceptable to the 
governor. 
* What if . . . ? Let's say Wilson and the Legislature cannot agree on a plan. 
Then, most likely, the issue would land in the courts. In such a deadlock in 
the early 1970s, the state Supreme Court drew the lines for both Congressional 
and Legislative seats. In the 1980s, the Democratic governor and Legislature 
agreed on a plan, but Republicans challenged it in the courts. The case was 
finally dismissed in 1989. In the case of a protracted conflict, the courts 
could order 1992 elections held in the old districts or under a new plan with 
the understanding that those district lines could change before the 1994 
voting. 
