BEILENSON AMONG FEW TO QUESTION PANAMA INVASION; 
CONGRESS: DEMOCRATS BERMAN AND WAXMAN JOIN REPUBLICANS GALLEGLY, MOORHEAD AND 
THOMAS IN SUPPORTING THE PRESIDENT'S DECISION TO SEND TROOPS. 
President Bush's decision to invade Panama prompted support from two Democratic 
and three Republican congressmen from the San Fernando Valley area Wednesday 
but drew criticism from Rep. Anthony C. Beilenson (D-Los Angeles). 
"I don't think we have the right to remove foreign governments we don't like, 
and I don't think the rationales the President gave are terribly convincing, 
nor are they terribly different from the rationales that could have been given 
a month ago," said Beilenson, who wields foreign policy clout as head of the 
House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence. 
In contrast, liberal Democratic Reps. Howard L. Berman of Panorama City and 
Henry A. Waxman of Los Angeles applauded Bush for moving against Panamanian 
Gen. Manuel A. Noriega, who has been indicted in the United States on drug 
charges. They were joined by GOP Reps. Elton Gallegly of Simi Valley, Carlos J. 
Moorhead of Glendale and William M. Thomas of Bakersfield. 
The initial response among Valley-area lawmakers mirrored national 
congressional reaction; Beilenson was one of the very few representatives to 
voice opposition to Bush's action. 
"If there is ever a case for an American military intervention of this kind, 
this was the case," said Berman, a House Foreign Affairs Committee member. 
"We're dealing with a dictator who stole an election, who had been indicted for 
violating U.S. laws, who had taken actions which were on the verge of 
destroying the economic viability of his own people. 
"In the long run, more American and Panamanian lives would have been in 
jeopardy from letting the situation continue than the actual casualties we are 
taking and foisting on the Panamanian people by the intervention." 
Gallegly, who also sits on the Foreign Affairs Committee and visited Panama 
recently, said of Noriega: 
"By declaring Panama in a state of war with the United States and by the 
unprovoked murder of an American Marine and the assaults on several other 
Americans during the past few days, it was clear that U.S. lives were in 
danger. In addition, there are reports that Noriega had threatened the Panama 
Canal." Thomas, whose 20th District includes the northern Antelope Valley, said 
Noriega "is getting what he asked for." Added Moorhead, "I don't think that 
Bush had any choice." 
Beilenson, who joins other congressional leaders for regular foreign policy 
meetings with Bush and top administrative aides, learned of the military action 
at 1:45 a.m. when CIA Director William H. Webster called him. 
"He told me what he knew at the time," Beilenson recalled. "That the troops had 
already gone in and, from scattered earlier reports, things seemed to be going 
well." 
However loathsome Noriega may be, Beilenson said, he is not unique among the 
world's dictators. The veteran lawmaker added that the situation in Panama had 
changed only modestly in recent days and that both Noriega's indictment and his 
theft of the Panamanian election had occurred some time ago. 
"If it were clear that there was an all-out assault on American personnel that 
was ordered or led by the government and the American armed forces already down 
there could not properly defend themselves, then the President has a duty to 
send in forces to protect those personnel," said Beilenson, who was also 
critical of former President Reagan's decisions to invade Grenada and bomb 
Libya. 
"I don't think that's the situation we were faced with." 
Beilenson has generally praised Bush's foreign policy, including the 
President's decision not to assist in the failed coup against Noriega in 
October. The legislator said criticism of the Administration's inaction at that 
time sowed the seeds for Wednesday's invasion. 
"They were probably looking for, or alert to, an opportunity should one arise," 
he said. "Plus the fact that it's a Grenada-like operation or it's hoped to 
be," meaning that it will not last long or cost many American lives and will be 
politically popular, even in Panama. 
Berman agreed that there was "a great deal of clamor on the Hill for more 
decisive action sooner." 
Nevertheless, he added: "The action is significantly less than a total success 
if we can't bring Noriega to justice and if he retains an ability to control 
military forces in Panama that allows this to continue." 
