PANAMA: DIGGING A U.S. HOLE; 
POLICY: GEN. NORIEGA IS GONE BUT U.S. TROOPS REMAIN. INVOLVEMENT MAY HAVE BEEN 
THE RIGHT IDEA IMPLEMENTED IN A FAULTY WAY. 
In 1903, Theodore Roosevelt helped carve the Republic of Panama out of 
neighboring Colombia, to facilitate the digging of a great canal for the United 
States. 
In 1989, George Bush may have dug a different hole for the United States, 
launching an overkill invasion of little Panama to do away with the regime of 
Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega. 
Panama's existence has been punctuated by coups, revolutions, political 
assassinations and periodic anti-American riots. But nothing in Panama's 
volatile past compares with the chaos of the last two years, the buildup of 
extraordinary hostilities -- two Presidents of the United States versus the 
detestable, cunning, resourceful Noriega. Even prior to last week's invasion, 
the Panamanian economy was virtually destroyed by U.S. sanctions and the 
Panamanian democratic impulse was quashed by Noriega oppression. 
The United States calls its operation "Just Cause," almost as if wishing will 
make it so. As a reporter, I have covered a number of U.S. military actions in 
Latin America -- the Bay of Pigs, intervention in the Dominican Republic, 
Grenada. Like those disputed operations, Just Cause suffers from failures of 
intelligence and political planning. 
Assuming that the impulsions were correct, that to protect American citizens 
and to safeguard Panama Canal shipping, Noriega had to be ousted, the huge 
question now is whether the means suited the ends. The world watches an 
invasion, with civilian and military casualties. Noriega soldiers, famous for 
their bullying and brutality, have turned into looters. U.S. troops, famous for 
their training and technology, have turned into policemen, the only functioning 
law and order on the isthmus. 
Noriega, days after the invasion, was still at large. The American troops, by 
contrast, may have to remain in Panama for an indefinite stay. 
Once again, U.S. action appears to have proceeded from wrong assumptions. Among 
the most wrong: 
 -- Noriega would be quickly found and captured. 
 -- Noriega followers in the Panama Defense Forces (PDF) would refuse to fight 
and would lay down arms. 
Considering the presence of military intelligence and Central Intelligence 
Agency experts in Panama, Noriega's whereabouts should have been pinned down, 
especially after all the years of plotting against him. Or, at the moment of 
launch, the White House should have been warned by U.S. intelligence that the 
general was not available, at home or office. On the first day of combat, he 
mocked his American enemies by broadcasting an appeal for resistance from a 
clandestine radio station. 
The PDF did not lay down its arms, nor did the paramilitary "Dignity 
Battalion." Washington, despite its familiarity with Panama, seems to have 
ignored the fact that Noriega's top officers and their soldiers had close ties, 
military and financial, to the general. 
Washington also seems to have ignored Panamanian pride in independence. While 
the middle class is uniformly opposed to Noriega -- especially after he 
annulled the results of last May's presidential election -- the general enjoys 
considerable support among the poor. He is a demagogue -- and an effective one, 
full of populist pretensions. The Bush Administration should have realized that 
an invasion would inevitably trigger a nationalist reaction. 
No amount of prior experience seems to have taught proper lessons about the 
quality of intelligence or the cultural gap between peoples. The U.S. 
government still cannot comprehend how Latin American societies respond to 
events of this kind, not even how these societies function. 
After the 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion, the CIA admitted having believed the 
entire island would rise against Fidel Castro the moment the U.S.-organized 
brigade of Cuban exiles came ashore. In reality, even Cubans who had turned 
against Castro saw the invasion as an attack on national sovereignty and 
consequently stood behind their "Maximum Leader." 
In the 1983 invasion of Grenada, the intelligence failure was underestimating 
the readiness of a tiny island army, bolstered by armed Cuban workers who were 
building a new airport. They could not repel the United States but they could 
embarrass it -- and they could cause an unacceptable number of U.S. casualties. 
In Panama, what was to be a "clean surgical strike" (in the words of a Pentagon 
briefer) turned into nasty and costly urban warfare. PDF positions in the 
capital had to be bombed Thursday night, an action not previously deemed 
necessary. An attack on Noriega headquarters in the middle of a densely 
populated working class barrio caused considerable physical damage -- and a 
number of civilian casualties. 
The paradox was plain outside Panama. Military action by the world's most 
powerful democracy was killing innocent civilians while the security forces of 
now-dethroned Romanian dictator Nicolae Ceausescu were gunning down 
pro-democracy demonstrators. 
The White House has now acknowledged that U.S. military presence in Panama is 
"open ended." Whatever happens to Noriega, restoring order in the republic will 
take weeks, probably months. The Dominican intervention of 1965 may suggest a 
precedent. The United States sent in troops to quell a local civil war. The 
rebels were quickly defeated. The fighting was minimal. Yet U.S. forces 
remained for more than three months. Panama is a bigger operation, in fact the 
largest U.S. military involvement abroad since Vietnam. 
Could the ends have been served by better means? Many U.S. observers think the 
President should have ordered a first-rate commando operation, not an invasion, 
if the purpose was to grab Noriega. Others have almost palpable nostalgia for 
the days of quick, quiet covert operations -- a small band to accomplish 
mammoth change. 
The means adopted certainly made no friends in the Western Hemisphere. Most 
Latin American governments denounced the invasion, including Colombia where the 
democratic government is at war with the same drug cartels that were part of 
Noriega's moonlight enterprises. The invasion may complicate efforts at peace 
settlements in Nicaragua and El Salvador. The United States will have more 
trouble holding the moral high ground in relation to the leftist Sandinistas 
and the Salvadoran Marxist guerrillas. 
Was the right thing done in the wrong way? Was the wrong thing done in the 
wrong way? Just as U.S. troops remain in Panama, hostages to the invasion, U.S. 
policy remains a question mark, hostage to world perception. 
