HINTS FROM HELOISE: BURNED FINGER TEACHES LESSON ON MICROWAVES 
DEAR HELOISE: We all love our microwave ovens and wouldn't trade them for 
anything, but, as the old saying should go, "Familiarity breeds complacency." I 
fell victim to this and wanted to warn others, especially mothers with small 
children, to be alert to the different pattern of heating that results from 
microwaves. 
I heated a toaster pastry in the microwave oven and left it for 20 seconds as 
recommended on the box, but the pastry was still cool. However, it broke as I 
lifted it from the plate and a piece of the filling hit my finger. The filling 
was red hot. Hot enough, in fact, to cause a second-degree burn, with a 
blister, that was painful for about three hours even with ice held on it. 
I was lucky that it broke and burned only my finger. It could have been much 
worse had I taken a bite. The directions on the box clearly state "Caution: 
Fillings may become very hot." Because I'm so used to heating things in the 
microwave, though, I didn't pay any attention. 
Please remind everyone that foods heat differently in microwave ovens than they 
do in toasters or conventional ovens, so pay attention to instructions and 
warnings to avoid burns. 
 -- LEARNED LESSON, 
San Antonio 
DEAR LEARNED: Sorry you learned your lesson with a burned finger, but I 
appreciate your reminding all of us that whether you've been using a microwave 
for two months or 10 years, you still need to pay attention to directions and 
precautions. 
 -- HELOISE 
DEAR HELOISE: I have an easy way to save money on coffee. I make the first pot 
in a drip coffee maker with the regular amount of ground coffee. I leave the 
grounds in the pot, and then for the second pot of coffee, I put half the 
normal amount of ground coffee on top of them and brew as usual. 
For the third pot, however, I throw everything out and start all over. Economy 
is great, but if you carry it too far you lose fresh coffee flavor. And that is 
what we drink it for. 
 -- ESTHER, Red Oak, Iowa 
DEAR HELOISE: I love apples and want to buy plenty of them while they're on 
sale, but I'm not sure how to keep them. I don't want to try canning; will 
freezing work? 
 -- SANDRA, Seattle 
DEAR SANDRA: You bet. Apples freeze well for later use in pies, sauce and 
cooked dishes. Just peel, core and slice them, sprinkle with lemon juice or 
ascorbic acid (available at the grocery or supermarket) to keep them from 
turning brown, and put them in freezer containers or plastic freezer bags. Pack 
them in specific quantities, like 1-cup, 2-cup and 3-cup packs, so you'll have 
pre-measured amounts when you're ready to use them. Toss in the freezer, then 
use with your favorite recipe. 
 -- HELOISE 
DEAR HELOISE: I've found that kitchen utensils can serve many more purposes 
than those they were designed for. I use my pastry blender to chop hard-boiled 
egg yolks for deviled eggs. And an old pastry brush with a long handle does a 
super job of cleaning out the deep lint trap in my dryer. 
 -- NANCY, Shelbyville, Ky. 
DEAR HELOISE: When I bake a pie, the edges of the crust burn, yet when I cover 
them with foil, it (the foil) falls off. Is there a better way? 
 -- SUSAN, Baltimore 
DEAR SUSAN: Here's an easy-as-pie hint. Simply cover the pie completely with 
foil and securely crimp the edges under the rim of the pie plate. Next, 
carefully cut out the center of the foil, leaving the top of the pie exposed. 
The foil doesn't pop off the edges of the crust and you can enjoy the pie. 
 -- HELOISE 
 Send a time- or money-saving hint to Heloise, P.O. Box 795000, San Antonio, 
Tex. 78279. Letters will not be answered personally, but the best hints 
received will be used in the Hints From Heloise column. 
