MOVIE REVIEWS; 
BIG STARS, BIG STAKES; 
DIRECTORS BERNARDO BERTOLUCCI, LEFT, AND SYDNEY POLLACK SWEPT THE OSCARS WITH 
THEIR LAST FILMS -- 'THE LAST EMPEROR' AND 'OUT OF AFRICA.' TODAY, THEY GO HEAD 
TO HEAD WITH THEIR LATEST MOVIES.; 
BERTOLUCCI'S DESERT OF THE SOUL 
The New Yorkers of "The Sheltering Sky" (AMC Century 14), Port and Kit Moresby, 
are expatriates of the late 1940s, aware that they are living through the dying 
fall of their marriage as they travel the world with no urgency about their 
return, or about anything else for that matter. Disinterested now in America, 
they've sailed to Tangier, with crushing amounts of luggage and the hope of 
finding the enlightenment that has eluded them on their other exotic treks. 
When Paul Bowles created the Moresbys in 1949 in his novel, which soon reached 
cult status, Port and Kit and their desultory rush toward oblivion in the North 
African desert hit a nerve with more than a few readers. Here was their 
latter-day Scott and Zelda: Port, a composer, Kit a playwright/diarist, worldly 
and "artistic," drawn to the abyss with the inevitability of lemmings and the 
elegance of tango dancers. 
Little wonder Bowles' ascetic, unadorned prose, which ended in a blaze of 
precisely recorded sensuality, held readers. His story mirrored both 
existential and universal pain: a couple whose "sentimental bonds" weren't 
enough to hold together a marriage in shards. Then too, there was the teasing 
wonder of how close the novel came to Bowles' private life with his 
high-strung, talented wife, short-story writer/playwright Jane Bowles, who 
lived in an impenetrable thicket of fears and melancholies. 
Bowles called "The Sheltering Sky" "an adventure story in which the adventures 
take place on two planes simultaneously: in the actual desert and in the inner 
desert of the spirit." And in that inner desert, "sexual adventures fail to 
provide relief. The shade is insufficient, the glare is always brighter as the 
journey continues. And the journey must continue -- there is no oasis in which 
one can remain." 
Tricky stuff for film. But Bernardo Bertolucci -- with his impeccable 
production team, especially his great mind's eye, cinematographer Vittorio 
Storaro -- almost has it within his grasp. As the Moresbys, John Malkovich and 
Debra Winger are superb at suggesting a couple quiveringly attuned to each 
other's needs and neuroses after a decade of marriage, yet tragically unable to 
connect. 
And from the film's first moment there is a sense of place both terrifyingly 
vast and stifling. It's unthinkable that one could even cast a shadow on this 
Sahara, much less imprint oneself on its landmark-free expanses, while the inky 
tunnel-like passageways of its old villages promise danger at the every turn. 
"The Sheltering Sky," however, is a story of the loss of identity, the 
disintegration of the personality in the impersonal otherness of the North 
African desert. The sexual odyssey that seals it must be absolutely 
soul-obliterating. Bewilderingly, Bertolucci -- of all directors -- and 
co-screenwriter Mark Peploe have sentimentalized and softened this section so 
that the movie crumbles into a lofty soft-core travelogue with madness for its 
fade-out. 
The movie may work for the reader who has just put down Bowles' novel, with all 
the tensions and intrigues of its subtext still freshly in mind. To others, 
Kit, Port and Tunner, their upper-class, not-overbright traveling companion 
(newcomer Campbell Scott), may seem querulous and exhausting. 
The three form a triangle of sorts, with a vile English travel-writer mother 
and her son (Jill Bennett and Timothy Spall) as overripe comic relief. Tunner, 
who has money and the indefatigable cheer of a summer-stock juvenile, is 
dazzled by Kit, pursuing her without any sense of what life with a 
high-maintainance neurotic entails. 
Kit functions each day from an elaborate system of omens; a scraped knee or a 
spilled glass of water is a sign for something else, rarely anything good. Port 
is used to humoring her, holding her hand through her encyclopedic fears, 
rubbing her tummy on demand. But when Kit explains away their separate bedrooms 
to Tunner, airily saying, "The first rule of marriage is never confuse it with 
sex," she's also defining the gulf between her and her passive, sexually 
blocked husband. 
The most telling scene between Port and Kit is their attempt to lose themselves 
in lovemaking, after bicycling to a high desert ridge outside the village of 
Boussif. With part of the desert shadowed beneath them like a spreading ink 
blot, they try desperately to obliterate their separateness, but it's as sharp 
and distinct as the stones they're lying on. Miserably, they pull apart, and 
not even their mutual assurances of love can take away the pathos or the 
emptiness. (This and other explicit sexual encounters and the film's unabashed 
nudity are reasons for its R rating.) 
Eluding Tunner, the Moresbys find catastrophe in their path: Port's passport is 
stolen, they run into a black rain of flies, illness dogs them. But the fervor 
with which Port rushes them deeper and deeper into the Sahara makes it clear 
that whatever their destiny is to be, the Moresbys are racing forward to 
embrace it. 
When fate separates them, Kit stumbles onto the traveling caravan of the 
blue-turbaned Tuareg tribesman Belquassim (Eric Vu-An), but it's the film that 
loses its way. In the novel, Belquassim's unquestioned sexual authority and 
Kit's submission to it were obligatory steps toward the shattering ending. 
Bertolucci, full of "the ecstasy of improvisation," has declared that Bowles 
was fantasizing and has created a prettified, delicate sexual fantasy in its 
place for Winger and Bejart ballet dancer Vu-An. 
This, from the maker of "Last Tango in Paris"? It's unfathomable. Not even 
Bertolucci's use of the sad-eyed, 80-year-old Bowles himself, interacting with 
his own characters, is as disastrous a misstep -- although it comes close. 
Bertolucci and Bowles are in any case an odd pairing: the elegantly spare 
writer whose eye is fixed on a finite point of nothingness and one of the 
screen's most swooningly lush sensualists. The wonder is that as much of "The 
Sheltering Sky" works as well as it does. 
'THE SHELTERING SKY' 
Debra Winger Kit 
John Malkovich Port 
Campbell Scott Tunner 
Jill Bennett Mrs. Lyle 
Timothy Spall Eric Lyle 
Eric Vu-An Belquassim 
A Warner Bros. presentation of a Jeremy Thomas production. Producer Thomas. 
Director Bernardo Bertolucci. Executive producer William Aldrich. Screenplay 
Mark Peploe, Bertolucci, based on the book by Paul Bowles. Camera Vittorio 
Storaro. Production design Gianni Silvestri. Editor Gabriella Cristiani. Art 
director Andrew Sanders. Costumes James Acheson. Music Ryuichi Sakamoto. 
Additional African music Richard Horowitz. Running time: 2 hours and 18 
minutes. 
MPAA-rated: R (explicit sexual encounters, unabashed nudity). 
