SPECIAL REPORT: SEEKING A NEW WORLD; 
3. PLEDGING ALLEGIANCE TO ETHNICITY: CAN THE NATION-STATE SURVIVE?; 
NOW THAT THE LID OF THE COLD WAR IS OFF, MANY ARTIFICIAL 'MELTING POTS' ARE 
BOILING OVER. 
It was a peaceable revolt. On a sultry Balkan summer day last July, 114 members 
of the provincial Parliament of Kosovo, enough to constitute a quorum, 
assembled in front of their offices in this shabby capital. Discovering they 
had been locked out of the building by higher-ranking authorities, the motley 
collection of farmers, peasants and local businessmen decided to vote in the 
open air. 
The ballot was unanimous: Tiny Kosovo, a land-locked and desperately poor 
province in the southeast corner of Yugoslavia, declared its independence. 
It was a case of one fragment breaking away from another fragment. Kosovo, with 
a population that is 90% ethnic Albanian, was rejecting domination by ethnic 
Serbs. They in turn are struggling against Yugoslavia's other major ethnic 
groups, the Croats and Slovenes. The divisions run so deep they could bring on 
civil war, but for members of Kosovo's Parliament, the overriding issue was not 
national unity but freedom to express their Albanian identity. 
"The Albanians, being a small people, want to preserve the traditions they 
have," declared Ibrahim Rugova, a wiry, intense literary critic and leader of 
Kosovo's Democratic Alliance. 
At one level, Kosovo's action simply reflects the increasingly dangerous 
conflicts among rival nationalities in a Balkan state that did not even exist 
until 1918, when it was fashioned from the rubble of World War I by the 
victorious Allies. 
At a deeper level, however, the vote in Pristina reflects powerful forces that 
are tearing at governmental institutions all around the world -- forces that 
may redraw the map of nations, usher in decades of new instability and pose 
difficult and unfamiliar challenges to even the strongest powers. 
From China to Czechoslovakia, from South Africa to the Soviet Union, political 
movements centered around ethnicity, national identity and religion are 
re-emerging to contest some of the most fundamental premises of modern 
statehood. In the process, they are reintroducing ancient sources of conflict 
so deeply submerged by the Cold War that they seemed almost to have vanished 
from history's equation. 
Ten years ago, for example, Czechoslovakia was gripped by a struggle between 
liberal reformers and one of the most rigidly Stalinist governments in the 
Communist world. Today, the liberal reformers control Hradcany Castle, but 
ethnic tensions may split the country into two separate nations -- and the 
reformers themselves are divided over what to do. 
"The thought that ethnicities and nationalisms and all the other primordial 
loyalties would disappear as a result of modernization was premature," said 
Saad Eddin Ibrahim, a sociologist at the American University of Cairo, in 
assessing the post-Cold War era. "That was probably one of the big lessons of 
the 20th Century: Ideology is no substitute for interest or for geography. 
That's what we are rediscovering." 
And the implications of this resurgence of national, ethnic and religious 
passions are profound: 
* A host of modern nation-states are beginning to crumble because the concept 
of the "melting pot," the idea that diverse and even historically hostile 
peoples could readily be assimilated under larger political umbrellas in the 
name of modernization and progress, has failed them. 
Even in the strongest nations, including the United States, the task of such 
assimilation has proved difficult and the prognosis is for even greater tension 
in the decades ahead. 
* Turmoil in the Soviet Union and parts of China threaten to blow apart the 
last remnants of an imperial age that began more than 500 years ago. The 
turbulent dismantling of 19th Century European empires after World War II may 
be matched by new waves of disintegration within the Soviet and Chinese 
Communist empires, with incalculable consequences for the United States and 
other world powers. 
Stretching from the Gulf of Finland to the mountains of Tibet and beyond, the 
sheer scale of the potential instability would tax the world's capacity to 
respond. Ethnic unrest could spill into neighboring countries, old border 
disputes could reignite and, if the central governments tried to impose order 
with force, civil wars could erupt within two of the world's largest nuclear 
powers. 
* Around the globe, fundamentalist religious movements have entered the 
political arena in a direct challenge to one of the basic principles of the 
modern age: that governments and other civic institutions should be 
predominantly secular and religion confined to the private lives of individuals 
and groups. 
Since the end of the Middle Ages, when religion dominated not only government 
but every other aspect of society, the pervasive trend in the past 500 years 
has been to separate church and state. Now, in many parts of the world, 
powerful movements are insisting on a return to God-centered government. 
One consequence of this trend is to make dealings between states and groups 
more rigid and volatile: As the United States has learned with the Arab-Israeli 
conflict and the Iranian revolution, disputes are far harder to manage when 
governments root their positions in religious principle. 
For the major powers, what all this is likely to mean is decades of the most 
demanding kinds of foreign policy challenges. After years of being able to deal 
with many problems in simple East-West terms, policy-makers must now struggle 
to understand a profusion of diverse but inter-connected peoples and issues, 
decide which are important and which can be ignored, then devise effective 
strategies for responding. 
And the challenge may be particularly difficult for the United States because, 
especially in such areas as religion and ethnic identity, Washington will be 
forced more and more to cope with problems that Americans have traditionally 
regarded as personal matters lying outside the realm of politics or foreign 
policy. 
ETHNIC CONFLICTS REBORN 
There is no official demarcation line between Kosovo, one of Yugoslavia's two 
autonomous provinces, and Serbia, one of its six constituent republics. But the 
gulf separating them is evident all over Kosovo. Big red banners emblazoned 
with a black double-headed eagle, the Albanian flag, hang from the windows of 
shops and apartment blocks. Tall white minarets rise above rustic dwellings in 
what is now a Muslim stronghold. 
Here and there, anti-tank obstacles in the shape of small cement pyramids have 
been lined up beside the rough pavement in readiness for possible conflict. As 
cars pass, three children under the age of seven flash their fingers in a V, 
Kosovo's symbol for independence. 
But the feeling runs both ways. The day after Kosovo's Parliament declared it a 
separate republic, it was suspended by the Serbian government -- which has 
administrative authority over the police and other official institutions in 
Kosovo despite its nominal autonomy. Although they now account for only about 
10% of its population, Serbs regard Kosovo as "the cradle of the Serbian 
nation." They are determined not to lose their historical heartland. 
The roots of the conflict go back centuries. Orthodox monasteries dot Kosovo's 
craggy mountainsides, mute testimony to a time when the region was 
unquestionably Serbian. The Battle of Kosovo in 1389 still haunts the Serbian 
memory: The Ottoman Empire vanquished Serbia's armies and imposed a dominion 
that lasted for 500 years. 
When modern-day Yugoslavia was carved out of the remains of the Ottoman and 
Austro-Hungarian empires by the Treaty of Versailles after World War I, Serbia 
regained control of Kosovo, only to begin losing it again to a demographic tide 
of ethnic Albanians. 
The conflict between Serbs and ethnic Albanians is one of several divisions 
troubling Yugoslavia. Predominantly Catholic Croatia and Slovenia now demand 
autonomy. And the old quarrels are kept alive by present-day slights and 
discrimination. 
On a recent trip to Slovenia from Serbia, Predag Simic, director of the 
Institute of International Politics and Economics in Belgrade, was stopped by 
Slovene police six times in two days because his car had Serbian license 
plates. At local businesses, his checks on a Belgrade bank were not accepted. 
"The problem really reaches very deep," sighed Franjo Tudjman, the burly 
president of the Croatian republic, who was twice imprisoned during the 
Communist era. During an election campaign stop in a Serbian stronghold inside 
his own republic last spring, someone tried to shoot him. 
Such things should not be surprising. The Treaty of Versailles bundled together 
five nationalities, four languages, three religions and two alphabets to create 
the Adriatic nation. 
"Having Yugoslavia was wrong to begin with," mused Veton Surroi, a young writer 
and president of the Yugoslav Democratic Initiative in Pristina. "It was an 
unnatural country." 
And, while Yugoslavia is sometimes dismissed as unique, the kinds of national 
and ethnic currents pulling it apart are battering many countries around the 
world. Of all the "isms" of the 20th Century -- or, indeed, the 18th and 19th 
centuries -- nationalism is among the most enduring. 
"The idea of the melting pot and assimilation was part of the American 
imagination," said Firuz Kazemzadeh, a Yale historian. "It worked to some 
extent, imperfectly, in the United States. But it did not work in other parts 
of the world where assimilation was usually imposed by forces which were not 
acceptable to the masses of the people." 
In Eastern Europe, the unhappy marriage between Czechs and Slovaks threatens to 
break up; Bulgaria's Turkish population, long suppressed so ruthlessly that 
parents were forbidden to give their children Turkish names, is demanding 
freedom; and in Romania, ethnic nationalists clash with the Hungarian minority 
in hand-to-hand combat. 
In Africa, tribal hatreds that produced decades of slaughter continue unabated. 
In parts of South America, Indian and Mestizo and European-stock populations 
inhabit the same countries but live in different worlds with little hope of 
unity. Although Peru has been independent from Spain since 1824, "We are still 
not a nation," lamented Luis Bustamante, a Peruvian lawyer and politician. 
"Most Latin American countries are not yet nations." 
Across Central Asia, vast areas of the Soviet Union and China are torn by 
ethnic conflict. More than 1,000 people have already died in fighting among 
Kirghiz, Uzbek, Meshketian and other groups. 
In European Russia, Lithuanians, Latvians, Georgians and other national groups 
are asserting their independence as well. And if such tensions lead to the 
breakup of the Soviet empire, and parts of China as well, the result would be 
instability over a vast portion of the globe, with the possibility of many 
conflicts spilling beyond national borders. 
Even the West is plagued by both nationality and ethnic conflicts. In Canada, 
French Quebec threatened to secede if it was not given special status, while 
Mohawk and Cree Indians and Eskimos have confronted the government over 
millennia-old claims to ancestral lands. 
In Belgium, after 600 years, only an uneasy truce curbs the hostility between 
Dutch-speaking Flemings and French-speaking Walloons. The split has divided the 
country with such surgical precision that the ancient University of Louvain 
even divided the books in its library equally between two new, and separate, 
universities, a Flemish University of Louvain and a French Universite Leuven. 
France itself, where one of the world's most dominating cultures has absorbed 
centuries of newcomers by transforming them into Frenchmen, now struggles to 
digest new waves of Arab immigrants. 
Especially in Africa, Asia, the Middle East and other areas subjected to 
colonialism, national boundaries often reflect decisions imposed from outside. 
The modern map of Africa was drawn by Europeans under the guidance of Belgium's 
King Leopold at the 1884 Conference of Berlin, for example, with total 
disregard to tribal lands and divisions. 
In the Middle East, much of the Arab world was divided into new nation-states 
by France and Britain in the Sykes-Picot Agreement of 1916, with limited 
recognition of sectarian, communal or religious divisions. The same is true for 
much of Latin America. 
"Not many nations around the world can claim to be genuine nations," asserted 
Luis Bernardo Honwana, Mozambique's minister of culture and noted African 
writer. 
"We not only have historically different national individualities," explained 
Croatia's President Tudjman. "We also have nations who belong to completely 
different civilizational and cultural spheres. Serbs belong to the Eastern 
Byzantine civilization. Croats and Slovenes belong to the Western Catholic 
civilization. 
"It's not by chance that this is the line where the Roman Empire split. 
Christianity split in the same place into Eastern Orthodox and Western 
Catholic." 
Why do people attach such profound importance to ethnic traditions seemingly so 
remote from the modern world? 
"What we are facing is the reaction of these groups against oblivion," 
Mozambique's Honwana believes. "In order to be part of an ensemble, of a group, 
one had to give up something, probably much more than one was prepared to give 
up. And one had to absorb some foreign, some strange values. 
"Now we're trying to make sure that we are not destroyed as a cultural entity," 
he said. "Simply, unity cannot be built at the cost of the existence of some of 
the elements which are going to be part of this unity." 
"Mankind has known itself for 8,000 years, in terms of written history," 
reflected Tudjman. "During all that time, there have been great universalist 
ideas, civilizational, cosmopolitan efforts to create a unified world -- 
Christian, Islamic, Buddhist, even Communist. 
"But all of that is disappearing and what remains is man and his ethnic 
national community. It still exists today when the world is turning into a 
global village. And still the smallest national individualities claim a place 
in that world." 
"There is a great task ahead to clarify what exactly a nation is, what its role 
is in modern liberal civilization, whether it has, in fact, meaning," said 
Daniel Kroupa, a political philosopher and member of Czechoslovakia's new 
Parliament. 
At the same time that many states and societies are fragmenting over religion, 
ethnicity and national culture, their people nourish hopes of achieving 
economic progress by allying themselves with one or another of the new trade 
blocs now taking shape. Yet in many cases such dreams may be difficult to 
realize. Civil strife and dogmatic politics hold little enticement for foreign 
investors; bankers lend money to people whose first priority is money. 
But the future well-being of millions of people appears to depend on whether 
ways can be found to reconcile the potentially conflicting impulses toward 
political separatism and economic integration. 
As such tiny but thriving entities as Switzerland, Hong Kong and Singapore 
attest, large size is not a prerequisite for economic growth and prosperity. In 
the abstract, there may be no reason why Serbs, Croats, Czechs, Slovaks, 
Quebecois and English Canadians could not go their separate ways in peace and 
plenty. 
Clearly, that is what many national and ethnic groups expect. "The next stage, 
they are liberated, they feel free. They will be able to make their choice," 
said Helmut Wagner, a political scientist at the Free University of Berlin. 
"They will long for, they will pray for becoming part of a bigger union which 
they can accept freely and which gives them their autonomy in special areas, 
especially in language, culture and their own ways," he said. "This is as 
strong as the disintegration effort, to become a member of a bigger union." 
Again, Yugoslavia illustrates the hope. Even as the country hurtles toward 
disintegration, Croatia and Slovenia have opened independent offices in 
Brussels, seat of the European Community. "I would certainly prefer that the 
capital of Croatia be Brussels and not Belgrade," which lies in the Serbian 
republic, declared Dr. Zvonko Letrovic, a political science professor and 
member of the Croatian Social-Liberal Alliance. 
For many of the nations now torn by internal strife, however, qualifying for 
admission to something like the European Community may not be easy. Some of the 
fragments that result from the disintegration of existing states may have 
little to offer the large economic blocs or the global economy as a whole. 
Equally hazardous, their focus on issues of religion and national and ethnic 
identity -- as well as the potential for continued strife, since hostile 
minorities are likely to remain inside most of them -- may itself be an 
impediment to the outside investment that is indispensable for economic growth. 
And West Germany's Wagner pinpointed the probable cost if successful liaisons 
are not made: "If you don't do that, you have to pay a price and the price is 
economic misery." 
Where such obstacles are overcome, analysts predict, the traditional 
nation-state may be replaced by new, still-undeveloped forms. 
"We have to find and create something new . . . structures as open as possible 
and as cooperative as possible," said Goertmaker, the German historian. 
"We see localization, villagization of the globe. But you also see an 
internationalization of the globe. The two trends are emerging side by side," 
said Ibrahim, the Egyptian sociologist. "The challenge for everybody is how to 
reconcile these two trends -- not stop either one, because they are 
nonstoppable." 
"How could I assert my local identity in food, in lifestyle, in dress, in 
feelings and so on and yet not be isolated or insulated or enclaved or 
marginalized or forgotten? That is the challenge now, and it will continue to 
be the challenge in the first two or three decades of the 21st Century." 
TALES FROM THE TEMPLES 
Blowing rams horns, the band from the Temple Mount Faithful set out Oct. 8 on a 
symbolic march. A court order barred the 300 Israelis from bringing a three-ton 
cornerstone for a new Jewish temple anywhere near Jerusalem's most sacred 
square -- the site of two successive biblical-era Jewish temples, but, for the 
last 13 centuries, the preserve of two of Islam's holiest shrines. The 
Faithful, however, were determined to show that "the Temple Mount will not be 
silent until it is again the religious and national center of our people." 
Within hours, the ancient city witnessed its worst violence since the 1967 war: 
20 Palestinians killed and hundreds of Arabs and Israelis injured. 
Twenty-two days later, the tragedy was repeated in India. 
In Ayodhya, a holy city in the great basin of the sacred Ganges river, Hindus 
massed to build a temple at the birthplace of the god Rama. Villagers 
countrywide had baked bricks inscribed with the Lord Rama's name for a ceremony 
astrologers ordained most auspicious between 9:44 a.m. and 11:48 a.m. on Oct. 
30. 
For four centuries, however, the site has been occupied by a mosque. It is 
considered no less sacred by Muslims than by the Hindus. 
As in Israel, the government tried to preempt trouble. The ceremony was banned, 
a curfew imposed and 90,000 Hindus detained. Police surrounded the simple 
mosque. But, by day's end, the march had been attempted anyway and 20 were 
dead, hundreds wounded in violence that swept six Indian states. 
The tale of two temples reflects one of the most striking trends at the end of 
the 20th Century: In the world's most secular age, religion has emerged as a 
major political force. Vigorous and successful religion-based political 
movements are challenging the political status quo worldwide. 
"With few exceptions, not since before the Age of Enlightenment has religion 
been so globally vital, energetic and ambitious," said Ehud Sprinzak, a 
political scientist at Jerusalem's Hebrew University. 
But politicized religions have less to do with changes among major faiths than 
with the contemporary political and cultural environment. 
The common denominator among disparate movements with diverse flash points, 
tactics and goals is a reaction against -- even a rejection of -- some of the 
most basic characteristics of the modern world. For millions of people in 
different parts of the world, the search for identity, security and fulfillment 
remains unquenched by the logic of the Age of Reason, by the universal rights 
promised by the Enlightenment or by the material progress of the scientific 
era. 
"It's not a theological revolution, not that suddenly some philosopher came and 
demonstrated the existence of God that wasn't available before," said Rabbi 
David Hartman, a philosopher and director of Israel's Hartman Institute. 
Rather, he and other scholars suggested, it is a reaction against the 
predominantly secular quality of modern politics and public culture. 
It is also a reaction to the tendency of traditional values to be swept aside 
in periods of rapid change. 
"The worldwide upsurge in religion owes less to renewed piety than to the fact 
that religious institutions offer a familiar and psychologically comfortable 
alternative to the status quo elites and their politics," said the Peace 
Institute's Norton. 
Three prominent voices from three prominent religions echoed similar themes: 
Said Rachid Ghannouchi, a philosopher and founder of Tunisia's Islamic Tendency 
Movement: "Western thought is based on the principle that society can build a 
civilization without God. The slogans of development and nationalism and 
science were represented as substitutes for God. But this new God did not give 
happiness or stability to people. Science acknowledges that the human is so 
high and so wide, but it does not take into account man's depth." 
Similarly, Eliyakum Haetzni, a member of Israel's Knesset and a West Bank 
settler, reflected: "After we try to shed in this century all those things 
which have nothing to do with pure reasons, we found that pure reasons are 
something very sad, very empty." 
Added Gustavo Gutierrez, the founder of Catholicism's Liberation Theology: 
"Modernity was born with the affirmation of the individual as the beginning, as 
the basis of the social contract. But a mentality which has the individual as 
the absolute principle" does not fulfill the basic human needto believe that 
life is something more than just a process of survival. 
Virtually all modern ideologies have divorced faith from government. Communism 
erased religion. Democracy privatized it. Even Zionism originally separated 
synagogue from state. 
Ideologies in countries with strong, single religious traditions -- Peronism in 
Catholic Argentina and Kamalism in Islamic Turkey -- either ignored or gave lip 
service to those traditions. Even apartheid, justified by South Africa's white 
Calvinist leaders with Old Testament quotations, is secular. 
And for substantial numbers of people, in varying degrees, each has failed. 
"The promises of modernity in its various forms -- whether an industrial 
consumer society or a classless society -- don't seem to have worked out," said 
Harvey Cox, a Harvard theologian. 
"There are all these terrible features all over, from atomic war to new 
diseases like AIDS to the fact that people in New York are sleeping, in the 
richest city in the world, on the streets," said Teddy Kollek, Jerusalem's 
legendary mayor. "The normal liberal attitude has not provided the answer." 
As a result of disillusionment or malaise, Hebrew University's Sprinzak added, 
"More people today are leaving ideology on the road to theology in search of 
political solutions to the miseries of our times." 
In some cases, religion is a refuge of last resort; in countries where 
opposition is outlawed, the church, mosque, synogogue or temple provides an 
alternative to mobilize dissent. 
When most of South Africa's black leaders were exiled or imprisoned, Desmond 
Tutu, now the Anglican archbishop of Cape Town, led the anti-apartheid 
campaign; he won the 1984 Nobel Peace Prize. Buddhist monks have spearheaded 
opposition to Chinese Communist control of Tibet; the Dalai Lama won the 1989 
Nobel Peace Prize. 
In East Berlin, the Lutheran Gethsemane Church was the command center for 
public vigils and the pro-democracy movement before the fall of the Berlin 
Wall. 
"The (opposition) movement came out from the churches. I think it is quite 
impossible that (the revolution) would happen without the church," said Konrad 
Vekel, a member of New Forum during an interview after Sunday services at the 
19th-Century church. 
In other cases, religion is an anchor at a time of turmoil. 
"Modernity is like a violent tornado. When there's a tornado, what do people 
do? They go to the basement and cling to pillars," said Max Hernandez, a 
Peruvian psychiatrist and historian. 
"It's the same with the current political transition. As the tornado sweeps 
through, people go to the basements of their soul and cling to the pillars -- 
things that have survived other political tornadoes, things like religion and 
ethnic roots." 
And in many corners of the globe, religion is not just challenging an existing 
order: It is defining the political spectrum where no clear consensus has 
existed. 
"In those countries in which the national struggle has not yet been completed, 
religion -- in the form of religious parties, extremist movements and religious 
leaders -- is going to be a major participant," said Sprinzak. 
But politicized religions add complex new dimensions to the political spectrum, 
as the 1979 Iranian revolution demonstrated. 
Islam has since become a powerful player throughout the Middle East, testing 
all forms of government, often by violence but sometimes by democratic means. 
The Islamic Salvation Front swept the first multi-party elections in socialist 
Algeria's independent history in June. In the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, 
Muslims last year won 33 of the 80 parliamentary seats in the first elections 
since 1967. 
Nowhere, however, is the challenge to the secular identity of the state more 
visible -- in scope or complexity -- than in India, the world's largest 
democracy. 
This year, India was near war with Pakistan over Kashmir, where Muslims are 
fighting to secede. In Punjab, the death rate now averages 600 a month in 
violence over the Sikhs' demand for autonomy or, among extremists, secession. 
But the issue that sealed the fate of the last two governments is the hill in 
Ayodhya where Hindus want a temple for Lord Rama. When former Prime Minister 
Rajiv Gandhi allowed fundamentalist Hindus to lay a foundation stone for the 
temple last year, Muslims withdrew their support from his Congress Party. In 
last year's elections, Gandhi, whose party had ruled India all but two years 
since independence in 1947, lost. 
The same election marked the stunning rise of the Hindu fundamentalist 
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). With the temple issue as the centerpiece of its 
campaign in a country that is 82% Hindu, the BJP's seats in Parliament soared 
from two to 86. It became the third-largest party in India and the key member 
in the coalition succeeding Gandhi. 
"The overall growth of the party can be attributed to the people's 
disillusionment that the other ideologies are not . . . able to deliver," 
explained BJP leader Lal Krishan Advani, who looks more like a soft-spoken 
grandfather than a fanatic. 
Advani claimed that the BJP is a "Hindu renaissance movement rather than a 
fundamentalist or revivalist movement" and that he himself only occasionally 
went to temple. 
But he then asserted: "I am against secularism. It has become a euphemism for 
covering up your allergy to Hinduism. Here's a party that does not shy away 
from the word Hindu." 
When police cracked down after a defiant Advani led a monthlong, 6,200-mile 
"chariot journey" across India to mobilize support for the new temple, Prime 
Minister V.P. Singh defended the action in a televised speech, saying: 
"It is not a question of saving the government, but of saving the country. This 
is the biggest challenge we have faced since the independence of the country. 
Religious fanaticism is the first step toward the foundation for a theocratic 
state. It will be the death of India as a secular state." 
It was not an overstatement. Three groups more extreme than the BJP now 
advocate a Hindu Raj or Hindutva, a Hindu nation-state. 
And after Advani's arrest, the crisis exploded. Despite the ban on the temple 
ceremony, thousands of youths, many wearing saffron headbands signifying the 
Hindu faith and shouting: "Hail the Lord Rama," broke through police 
barricades. Defying tear gas and rifle fire, they planted three saffron flags 
on the mosque's domes. 
With their leaders under arrest, militant BJP Hindus withdrew their support for 
the coalition. Singh's government collapsed. 
Ironically, historians seriously doubt the site really was the birthplace of 
Lord Rama. 
"Can you prove this is the birthplace of Rama?" Advani said. "No, you can't. No 
one can prove it. The issue is not whether it is the birthplace of Rama. The 
issue is whether it is believed to be the birthplace of Rama. 
"This," he pronounced, "is a belief." 
Religious fanaticism is hardly new. The words thug, zealot and assassin are 
derived from ancient extremist movements within Hinduism, Judaism and Islam. 
But in modern times, religious issues have rarely had such grass-roots impact 
on political agendas, nor such global repercussions. 
In Jerusalem, what began as a religious march by 300 members of the Temple 
Mount Faithful resulted in two U.N. resolutions and a crisis so dramatic it 
threatened to shift world attention away from the Persian Gulf crisis. 
And it offers a vivid example of how disputes rise to a higher plane when a 
religious component is added. 
For the Temple Mount Faithful, the issue is not just whether a small band of 
Jews should be allowed entry to an area. It is instead man's salvation. "We 
live now in an age which uses words like redemption and is a little ashamed to 
do so because it is a very logical age," explained Gershon Solomon, the 
Faithful's leader. "My struggle is not just for the physical site. We must make 
the Temple Mount as it was in the past, the religious, spiritual and national 
center of all the Israeli and Jewish people." 
Like Advani, Solomon, a white-haired scholar, said he is not a fundamentalist 
and only occasionally goes to synagogue. "Our movement is nationalist," he 
insisted, adding in the same breath: "Our coming back to the Temple Mount is 
the will of God." 
But in this case, fulfilling God's mission means replacing the two Islamic 
shrines where Mohammed is believed to have ascended into heaven to hear the 
word of God. 
"Jerusalem, eventually, will only be divided on religious lines: conflict 
between Arabs and Jews and between Jews and Christians," Mayor Kollek 
predicted. "Nationalism will fade out, and it will remain a religious 
conflict." 
The shifting focus has already altered the longstanding political equations 
within the Arab and Israeli communities. While the Temple Mount Faithful is 
only a fringe group, Israel's religious parties have since 1984 gained 
sufficient clout to determine which of the country's two major political 
parties can form a coalition. 
But their support comes with demands, including bans on El Al flights on the 
Sabbath and movies on the Sabbath eve, as well as control of key government 
positions. 
As with India, the secular qualities of the Israeli state are eroding. 
Among Arabs, Hamas and Islamic Jihad, two Islamic factions, have challenged 
both the Palestine Liberation Organization and Israelis since 1987. 
The two Islamic parties differ deeply from the PLO on long-term goals. "The 
Islamic Resistance Movement considers that Palestine is inalienable Islamic 
land, assigned to Muslims until the end of time," the 40-page Hamas manifesto 
declares. 
Said Sprinzak, "Toward the end of the century, we find out that religious 
movements do not just want to participate in politics. They are fighting for 
ascendency, to take over. 
"They're not going to make it, but they will change the agenda. They've already 
changed the agenda, and they will change it more." 
Buzzwords for a New Decade 
* Informals -- Ad hoc institutions emerging in the world's megacities to deal 
with everything from jobs and housing to commerce and social services -- de 
facto states-within-states, all outside the control of government. 
* Lebanonization -- The process by which nations are torn apart in multifaceted 
conflicts over such issues as religion, national identity and competition for 
resources. 
* Nativism -- The practice or policy of favoring native-born citizens as 
opposed to immigrants. 
* Turkestan -- The name given to the dream of unifying under a single, 
independent political umbrella the estimated 135 million Turkic-speaking 
Muslims in the Chinese and Soviet Central Asian republics. 
A World of Conflicts 
Some of the countries of the world with emerging racial, ethnic, religious or 
other internal strife: 
* China 
* Czechoslovakia 
* India 
* Israel 
* Liberia 
* Myanmar 
* Pakistan 
* Peru 
* Philippines 
* Rwanda 
* South Africa 
* Soviet Union 
* Yugoslavia 
* Zambia 
Source: Los Angeles Times 
Nation Born of Empire's Remains 
Austria-Hungary and Ottoman Empire before World War I 
Present-day Yugoslavia 
