FISHING NOTES; 
ANGLERS SPOT FIRST MIGRATING GRAY WHALES CLOSE TO SHORE 
The first Pacific gray whales of the migration season passed close to shore 
Tuesday morning and were sighted by anglers aboard South Bay sportfishing 
boats. 
The whales migrate from the Bering Sea to Baja California lagoons where they 
mate before returning to the Arctic. 
Again this year all South Bay sportfishing landings will begin whale watching 
trips Dec. 26 and continue seven days a week until April. 
Each trip is led by naturalists trained by the Cabrillo Marine Museum. For more 
information call (213) 832-2676. For reservations and schedules call any South 
Bay sportfishing landing that runs daily trips. 
Anglers don't always have enough tackle when they try for scrappy game fish. 
Here are suggestions to give the avid angler on your gift list: 
New reel, spools of 10- to 80-pound test line, tackle box with assorted hooks, 
jigs, casting rod or trolling rod and as a stocking stuffer a fishing video. 
Jim Loo of Redondo Beach returned from a nine-day trip to Mexico with a 
69-pound wahoo. Paul Freidman of Torrance, on a trip to San Martin Island off 
Mexico, caught a limit of bull bass from seven to 12 pounds. 
Frank Hall of San Pedro, aboard the Diawa at Catalina, used 12-pound test line 
to land the whopper of the week, a 32-pound white bass. 
Dan Donhugh of San Pedro won the jackpot aboard the First String at Catalina 
with a 26 1/2-pound halibut. 
Leroy Smith of Westchester, on the Happyman, won the jackpot with a 24-pound 
halibut. Rex Mendoza of Wilmington, aboard the Mitless Miss at Rocky Point, 
caught a 14-pound white sea bass. 
Fish Reports: Anglers have been catching bass, sculpin and halibut in the bay. 
Rock cod fishing at Tanner Banks provided reds and lingcod. 
At Marina del Rey Sportfishing: The Spitfire checked out Venice Beach and 
anglers caught 350 sculpin and 110 sand and calico bass. The Happyman on a 
half-day trip returned with 55 calico bass, 32 rock fish, five sheepshead and 
one lingcod. The Betty O Rock cod special worked the shallow rocks and anglers 
chalked up 230 rock cod and two cow cod. 
Redondo Sportfishing: The City of Redondo half-day trip to Rocky Point had a 
catch of 170 bonito and one halibut. The Blackjack worked Catalina for 95 
calico bass, 32 rock fish, five sheepshead, two lingcod and one halibut. 
22nd Street Landing: The First String fished the west end of Catalina and 
anglers returned with 406 sculpin, 55 calico bass, seven bonito and four 
halibut. The Monte Carlo half-day run to Rocky Point produced 61 calico bass, 
19 bonito and one halibut. 
At L.A. Harbor Sportfishing: On the Matt Walsh half-day run to the Rock Pile, 
anglers sacked 109 sculpin, eight calico bass and one halibut. The Outerlimits 
worked San Clemente Island and Catalina for 100 blue perch, 75 whitefish, 70 
calico bass, 90 rock fish and one halibut. 
The Annie B barge had a weekend catch of 757 jacksmelt, 410 kingfish, four 
sculpin, two calico bass and two sharks. 
At Long Beach Sportfishing: On the Victory trip to Rocky Point, anglers sacked 
140 calico bass, 56 perch and 10 sculpin. The Southern Cal fished Horseshoe 
Kelp and anglers returned from the half-day trip with 39 calico bass, 13 perch, 
five sculpin and three whitefish. 
Freshwater Notes: Santa Ana River Lakes: 
Rodney Basset of Carson caught a five-fish limit of trout that totaled 15 1/2 
pounds. 
Randy and Cindy Long of Lomita bagged eight catfish using marshmallows. 
