BUYOUT SPARKS MOUNTAIN OF HOPE; 
MOUNTAINEERING: EMPLOYEES OF VENTURA-BASED ROCK-CLIMBING GEAR COMPANY CELEBRATE 
THEIR PURCHASE. 
In an unlikely business deal involving outdoorsmen turned entrepreneurs, 
employees of a Ventura-based mountaineering gear company pulled together a few 
million dollars to buy out their employer, forming a new company without a 
day's break in production or sales. 
Former Chouinard Equipment employees, now 51%owners of the new company, Black 
Diamond, celebrated the deal's culmination with a bash at company offices in 
east Ventura on Tuesday. 
"We have a very committed group of employees," said Peter Metcalf, the former 
general manager at Chouinard and now president and chief operating officer of 
Black Diamond. "We had to overcome a lot of problems to do this. I feel very 
fortunate we were able to pull it off." 
On Nov. 20, the employees signed agreements with Lost Arrow, the parent company 
of Chouinard Equipment, Patagonia Inc. and other companies that manufacture 
outdoor clothing and gear. 
Nov. 30 was Chouinard Equipment's last day of operations, and Black Diamond 
took over Dec. 1, Metcalf said. 
The buyout follows last spring's surprise bankruptcy filing by Chouinard 
Equipment. That move was designed to protect the deeper pockets of Lost Arrow 
from four lawsuits that claimed faulty instructions on the use of Chouinard 
Equipment products was responsible for injury to climbers. 
Lost Arrow has declined to comment on the suits. 
Jim Cegelski, an investment banker with a Los Angeles firm, helped 64 employees 
who had very little cash put together a deal to buy Chouinard Equipment's 
assets, which Metcalf said were between $2.5 million and $4 million. 
Chouinard Equipment, which manufactures technical rock-climbing gear such as 
pitons, carabiners, ice axes and chocks, the wedge-shaped pieces used to help 
climbers secure their positions, had sales of $7 million in the last fiscal 
year, Metcalf said. 
Cegelski called the deal an unusual arrangement that came together in the nick 
of time. 
"Small firms like this generally don't survive a Chapter 11," said Cegelski, 
who was in Ventura for the celebration. "The first thing that usually happens 
is that employees start leaving. We were very fortunate to bring this to the 
table in seven months; frankly I don't know that the business would have 
survived much longer." 
The deal Cegelski developed after seven months of negotiations allowed 
employees to take money from their 401K retirement accounts and roll those 
accounts over into a fund that purchased stock in Black Diamond. Those 
employees who had extra money, like Metcalf, also bought stock directly in the 
company. 
That amounted to just over 50%, to give the employees the controlling interest. 
Black Diamond also sold stock to "like-minded" investors, such as Naoe 
Sakashita, who heads a company coincidentally called Lost Arrow Japan, which 
has no relation to the Ventura company. Sakashita, a mountain climber of world 
renown, according to Metcalf, contributed substantially. Michel Beal, a French 
manufacturer of ropes for Black Diamond, also bought in. 
About two-thirds of the sale price was financed by a loan, Metcalf said. 
Lost Arrow and Patagonia will buy equipment from Black Diamond to sell at its 
retail stores, as it did from its subsidiary, but now it will buy on a 
competitive basis, said Lost Arrow spokesman Kevin Sweeney. The Black Diamond 
company employees, many of whom are friends or spouses of Lost Arrow employees, 
are now on their own, Sweeney said. 
"It's a completely separate company," he said. 
