FOUR SOUTH BAY PLAYERS ARE NAMED TO SUPER TEAM 
Four South Bay football players have been named to the All-CIF Southern Section 
all-star team, honoring the finest players from the section's 10 divisions, and 
were among 21 area standouts chosen to all-division teams. 
The selections, made by members of the Amateur Athletic Foundation/First 
Interstate Bank board of sportswriters, were announced today. 
The 48-player All-Southern Section super team included offensive lineman Brian 
Malcolm and running back-defensive back Jerald Henry of Serra, kicker Brett 
Ostergard of Miraleste and linebacker David Bohner of Palos Verdes. 
Malcolm, Henry and Ostergard were first-team selections. Bohner was named to 
the second team. The 6-foot-3, 280-pound Malcolm was the top lineman for a 
Serra team that went 10-1 and reached the Division VII semifinals. Henry was 
the South Bay's most explosive player, rushing for 1,705 yards in 160 carries 
(a 10-yard average) and leading the area with 25 touchdowns. Ostergard made 11 
of 15 field-goal attempts for Miraleste, including a 57-yarder. Bohner was the 
leader of a Palos Verdes team that reached the Division VIII final. 
Lompoc running back NapoleanKaufman was named the section's offensive player of 
the year and Loyola linebacker Andrew Casani and Bishop Amat end Jason 
Patterson were co-defensive players of the year. 
Three South Bay players were selected to the All-Division III team. They were 
offensive linemen Jared Tuione of Hawthorne and Mike Donnelly of Leuzinger, and 
linebacker Manny Gonzalez of Leuzinger. 
In Division VII, the area selections were Henry, Malcolm and linebacker Alex 
Marcelin of Serra, and Ostergard. 
The All-Division VIII team included 12 South Bay standouts. Palos Verdes led 
the way with three selections -- Bohner, running back George Felactu and 
offensive lineman Brandon Himelwright -- followed by West Torrance, South 
Torrance and Morningside with two choices each. 
Selected were running back Alex Schultz and offensive lineman Josh Gormley of 
West, defensive lineman Kevin Jones and defensive back David Rosato of South, 
and linebacker Danny Katoa and defensive back Kenny Birdine of Ocean League 
champion Morningside. 
Rolling Hills running back Robert Coulter, an All-Division II pick last year, 
Torrance offensive lineman Wade Owens and Mira Costa linebacker Simi Fonua 
rounded out the South Bay's Division VIII selections. 
The All-Division IX team was represented locally by offensive lineman Mike 
Patapoff and defensive back Matt Redlew of Santa Fe League champion Mary Star. 
