REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK JERRY HICKS: IGNORING THE 'BUMS' USED TO BE SO EASY . . . 
Most journalists in my office have always had genuine, heartfelt concern for 
the homeless. Not me. 
Frankly, I've been too busy. I have a kid to raise, a wife who wants me home 
nights, bosses to please and bills to pay. My compassion is for the plight of 
the Los Angeles Rams and the California Angels. 
I've found my own way of dealing with the homeless that's gotten me by just 
fine -- I don't think about them. 
Which is why it's so unsettling that I've had Earl on my mind lately. 
Earl is this guy who lives on the concrete at the Plaza of the Flags in the 
heart of the Civic Center in Santa Ana. 
I first came across Earl stretched out underneath the stars and his Catholic 
Charities blanket close to a year ago, as I walked through the plaza from my 
courthouse office to my car. His first words to me were: "Sir, you have a good 
evening." My first words to him were a grunt. And why not? It's a beautiful 
plaza, and this unsightly, unshaven, unkempt, unwelcome sprawling figure was 
trashing up the place with his blankets and shopping cart teeming with life's 
leftovers. 
By day, Earl was out scavenging. I'd see him only at night. "Sir, you have a 
good evening." Earl was a broken record. Same message every night. 
He had no idea he was intruding at a bad time, that twilight of the day when 
your brain is oozing out of its work mode and trying desperately to climb into 
the proper frame of mind for facing the wife and kid. It's not a time for small 
talk with the city's vagabonds. But after a few months, I decided he meant no 
harm. 
He wasn't Earl to me then, of course. He was just this nameless lie-about. A 
few months more, it came to me that Earl seemed to smile more than I did and 
seemed to care much more about my evening than I did about his. 
And then this funny little thing happened. Earl started to make me feel good. 
This bent-over piece of humanity with hollows at his shoulder blades seemed 
determined to make me smile back at him. My Scrooge-like grunts finally warmed 
up to at least "hellos" and "you doing OK?" I found myself leaving the 
courthouse wondering if Earl would be in the plaza. Earl's greeting helped ease 
the day's grind. Finally, I sheepishly realized that it was long overdue that 
we meet each other. 
Earl is a 53-year-old, skinny, raggedy, mostly toothless man who has been "on 
the road," as he calls it, the past five years. He won't tell me his last name. 
But he has a daughter somewhere back East that he still thinks about, and he 
really would work, but he explains the problem in a way that makes sense: 
"Nobody wants to hire someone like me, at my age. Only jobs I can get are the 
ones worth $20 an hour but they want you to do it for minimum wage." 
Says Earl: 
"I pick this spot because it's quiet. I love the peace and quiet. I love being 
alone. I've got a couple of row dogs (fellow homeless) who join me here most 
times, and we talk when we want. Don't you worry about me none, sir. I'm doin' 
just fine." 
That's the problem. I am worried about Earl. Because it's getting cold out. 
Winter is here and getting worse, and Earl's blankets are thinner than what I'm 
using at night inside a heated house. I try not to think about how many other 
Earls are out there facing those same cold nights with biting wind and icy 
concrete beds. 
It's easy to ignore the homeless, to leave such problems to folks like Catholic 
Charities, and hope their budgets can be stretched far enough to cover the 
basics. 
But it's hard to forget about Earl, once you've met him. 
