FIRST PERSON: WATCHING THE DAWN OF A DEMOCRATIC DAY IN HAITI 
Last Sunday Haitians went to the polls in their first free elections and named 
as president Jean-Bertrand Aristide. During Haiti's last attempt at democratic 
elections in 1987, more than 34 people died and voting was canceled. This time 
there was some violence and a woman was killed during a post-election 
celebration, but overall it was relatively peaceful. During the election, 
several thousand people from around the world and from different walks of life 
went to Haiti as election observers. Huell Howser, producer/host of "Videolog" 
on KCET-TV, was one of the observers. He filed this report for The Times. 
I had to step around two hogs rooting in a huge pile of garbage and then walk 
down a dark alley filled with flies. 
But once I turned the corner in this slum of Port-au-Prince, what I saw was 
worth it: Lines of Haitians voting for the first time. 
This whole adventure started last week with a phone call from Rep. David Dreier 
(R-La Verne), who asked if I'd like to be part of an international observer 
delegation for the upcoming Haitian elections. I didn't know how they were 
picked, but I remembered seeing election observers before on the news. I also 
was up enough on world events to know that Haiti has had more than its share of 
problems over the years -- especially when it comes to politics. But, I felt 
honored to have been asked, and instinctively said yes. Two days later, I found 
myself on a plane headed for this little Caribbean island republic, not sure 
what was going to happen, but ready for anything. 
Well, I didn't have to wait long. When you step off the plane at 
Port-au-Prince, you're stepping into a world -- a Third World -- that literally 
envelopes you with sensuousness. I'm not talking about sipping a cool drink by 
a cool pool. This is no Club Med. 
This is a country described as American by geography, French by language and 
African by tradition. A country still largely rural, illiterate and poor. A 
country which lays rightful claim to being the second oldest independent state 
in this hemisphere, but whose political past has been anything but democratic. 
A country that for a long time was ruled absolutely by the dictator Duvalier 
family and their dreaded private army, the Tontons Macoutes. 
But now the Haitians wanted to forget about Papa Doc and Baby Doc. They wanted 
free, fair and open elections where the government would be chosen by ballots, 
not bullets. In October, more than 80% of the eligible voters had registered 
and now it was time to put up or shut up. 
Would there be violence? Would the mere threat of violence keep people away? 
Would the government even allow the elections to take place? All of these were 
very real questions as we awoke at 4:30 on Election Morning and prepared to 
spread out across the country to observe the unfolding drama. 
I had done my homework. I'd attended all the briefings by the U.S. State 
Department officials, the U.S. Embassy officials, the Haitian election 
officials and had read my briefing book from cover to cover. I knew the names 
of the players and the rules of the game. I knew that all the observers had 
been invited by the Haitian government to watch the process and to report any 
irregularities. Our special badges allowed us access to any voting area, but 
only as an observer, not as an actual official. 
Being "briefed" was one thing; what I witnessed firsthand was another. 
I had been assigned to one of the slums of Port-au-Prince. Even now, it is very 
hard for me to explain how I felt when I first saw the lines. The lines that 
stretched around city blocks and out into the dusty streets. The lines that 
were so tightly packed that you couldn't see daylight through them. Lines 
containing 18-year-olds voting for the first time and 80-year-olds voting for 
the first time. Lines full of people dressed in their Sunday best. Lines that 
formed hours before the polls opened at 6 a.m. Some polling places were as much 
as eight hours late in opening because of a lack of ballot materials. But 
during all those hours, the lines didn't budge. No one left. 
Port-au-Prince has some of the worst slums in the world, and on Election Day 
those slums had the longest, straightest lines. Lines filled with people imbued 
with a sense of dignity and determination to stand -- however long -- and be 
counted. You could see it in their eyes. You could feel it. It was like that 
all day, all over the country. 
And after they voted and had their thumbs dipped in bright purple ink by 
election officials to show that they had voted, they proudly displayed their 
thumbs as a symbol to family and friends. 
During the day I visited at least 40 different polling places and I'm certainly 
not about to report that the election was without its problems. At some places 
there weren't enough ballots. At others, valid voter printout lists were 
incorrect, incomplete or in some cases non-existent. Voting machines are 
nonexistent, and the system was slow -- there was only one voting booth per 
polling place. Some booths were made of two folding cardboard shields. 
Complicating matters was the fact that each voter was handed five different 
paper ballots, covering national, regional and local races. Since an 
overwhelming number of voters are illiterate, the ballots were printed with 
symbols for each party, which voters marked with an "X." For example, the 
winning party's symbol was a rooster, and proud voters would crow 
"cock-a-doodle-doo" after putting their ballots in boxes. 
From time to time tempers got short and there was some yelling and shouting, 
but it was also obvious from the election judges to the voters that everyone 
was trying their best to cope and to make it all work. 
The Haitian peasants like to talk in proverbs, and one of their favorites is 
"Deye mon gen mon" which means, "Behind every mountain is another mountain." 
This election is only the beginning of the new Haitian story. Obviously. there 
are many mountains ahead and many experts will even now tell you the future of 
Haiti is cloudy at best. 
But as an "observer," I must report to you that I was blessed to have been in 
the slums of Port-au-Prince on Dec. 16, 1990, as its citizens taught me a new 
respect not only for the human spirit, but for a truly glorious idea called 
democracy. 
