DON'T CONFUSE EAST BLOC UNIONS WITH WESTERN ORGANIZATIONS 
Harry Bernstein is off the mark ("AFL-CIO Should Formalize Its East Bloc 
Contacts," Nov. 14) in comparing U.S.-Soviet Bloc exchanges in other fields 
with his proposed labor contacts. 
For example, American physicists have common ground -- interest in their 
science -- with their East Bloc counterparts, even if the latter were in the 
past forced into a government mold in their research. Cartographers have a 
common interest in their techniques, even if Soviet maps have been notorious 
(and often comical) for their deliberate distortions. Sculptors and painters 
have a common concern with art, even if East Bloc artists have been pressured 
into conforming to communist themes. 
But who are the Soviet counterparts of American union leaders and what are the 
common areas of interest? Surely, no one is proposing that exchanges be about 
steel making, oil drilling, machine shop work, carpentry and so on. The 
"business" of AFL-CIO leaders is empowerment of workers in a union movement for 
economic and social democracy through collective bargaining and other kinds of 
activism. 
The "leaders" imposed by the Communist Party and government on their labor 
fronts are not in that business. And their counterfeit imitations of unions are 
not unions by any rational definition. Even calling them unions legitimizes 
them -- a trap into which Bernstein falls. 
In contrast, Polish Solidarity is truly a union movement. It deserves the 
enthusiastic and unflagging support it has been receiving from the AFL-CIO. 
Others striving to build genuine independent unions in the East bloc have also 
been getting aid. And as totalitarianism crumbles, some individuals from other 
organizational entities may defect to authentic union groups and will need 
fraternal good will and assistance. But heads of the counterfeit unions have no 
particularly distinctive affinity for genuine unionism. 
MAX MONT 
LOS ANGELES 
The writer is executive director of the Jewish Labor Committee. 
