ECOLOGISTS ALARMED AS MEXICO CITY'S SMOG SEASON COULD BE WORST YET; 
ENVIRONMENT: HIGH LEVELS OF CONTAMINANTS ARE SATURATING THE AIR IN THE 
7,000-FOOT-HIGH CAPITAL. 
A quivering red sun rose over the world's largest city Monday, but rather than 
inspiring joy, dawn brought to mind a hangover-ridden morning-after as muted 
sunlight forced its way through a cloud of gaseous haze. 
The so-called "smog season" has hit Mexico City with a particular vengeance 
this year, and ecologists are warning that dangerously high levels of 
contaminants are saturating the oxygen-thin air over this 7,000-foot-high 
capital. 
Windless, colder-than-usual weather is producing daily thermal inversions that 
prevent the gray veil from dispersing. The ecologists warn that this may be 
Mexico's worst winter if the government does not take stronger action soon to 
control emissions from automobiles and industry. 
"This is alarming. It is very serious," said Luis Manuel Guerra, head of the 
Autonomous Institute of Ecological Research. "If this were Los Angeles or 
Denver, we would be in an alarm situation with the concentrations of pollutants 
that we have now." 
While publicly downplaying the problem, government officials did invoke the 
first stage of an emergency Environmental Contingency Plan over the weekend to 
reduce operations by 30% at dozens of industrial plants. Officials also 
restricted operations at the 18 de Marzo oil refinery in the heart of Mexico 
City's urban sprawl, saying that a mechanical failure had caused it to spew 
toxic sulfur dioxide. 
The plant resumed full operations on Monday after the problem was fixed, 
according to Sergio Reyes Lujan, assistant secretary of ecology and urban 
development. He said the state-owned Petroleos Mexicanos oil company, known as 
Pemex, would be heavily fined for the mess. 
Guerra said that his air samples show levels of lead, carbon monoxide and ozone 
two and three times higher than the maximum acceptable under Mexico's air 
quality standards. 
"For example, the maximum ozone level is 0.11 parts per million for one hour 
once a year. We have surpassed that 1,000 hours this year . . . over 300 days," 
Guerra said. Last Thursday, he said, the ozone measured .30 parts per million 
-- nearly three times the maximum. 
Last year, the government initiated a program called "Today, Don't Drive," 
requiring motorists to leave their cars home one day a week. Although the 
program initially produced results, ecologists say its effect has been 
neutralized by the estimated 275,000 automobiles newly registered in Mexico 
City during 1990. 
The government also began requiring semiannual exhaust tests on the estimated 3 
million cars in the capital. But critics say that corruption has diluted that 
program, too. 
"You can show up with the oldest, dirtiest car, but if you pay (a bribe), you 
pass," said Homero Aridjis, president of Mexico's Group of 100, an organization 
of leading intellectuals and environmentalists. 
Aridjis and Guerra, the most outspoken activists on the smog issue, say the 
government should adopt a more flexible contingency plan that goes into effect 
before pollution reaches such extreme levels. Industries should be forced to 
clean up their emissions, and much of the public transportation should be 
converted to butane and propane gas. 
"In the medium and long term, industries should leave the city. The only thing 
that can salvage the city is industrial and economic decentralization," Aridjis 
said. 
He noted that the government announced a 21-step plan to fight pollution in 
1987 and a program of 100 actions to improve air quality in the capital in 
1988, neither of which were completed. 
The environmentalists are urging the government to repeat a measure taken in 
1989 prolonging Christmas vacation in public schools until February, when the 
weather warms a bit and winds pick up. 
Doctors contacted Monday said they are seeing a dramatic increase in 
respiratory ailments, particularly among children, but lack the data to 
determine whether it is due to a virus, the cold weather or pollutants. 
Dr. Carlos Javier Arnaiz Toldeo, past president of the Mexican Pediatrics 
Assn., said 75% of the patients he sees now are suffering respiratory problems. 
That is about 10% above last winter. 
"Definitely, during this period of cold temperatures when the layer of 
contamination is (closer to the ground) for longer periods of time, respiratory 
problems increase, and especially in children," Arnaiz said. 
Many residents of Mexico City are complaining of chronic itching eyes, 
headaches, irritability and fatigue. El Universal newspaper reported that the 
Health Ministry registered 140,000 cases of respiratory illnesses in the first 
weeks of December. 
Reyes Lujan of the Ministry of Ecology and Urban Development said such ailments 
are "normal illnesses in the winter season." He admitted that ozone is still a 
serious problem in the capital, but insisted that lead and sulfur dioxide in 
the air are down sharply. 
Reyes Lujan said the emergency plan was put into effect over the weekend 
because the oil refinery was emitting sulfur dioxide, but Aridjis said the 
government's own measurements showed unacceptable levels of ozone and carbon 
monoxide as well for Friday through Sunday. It was the fourth time the plan has 
ever been implemented. 
"All of the contaminants reached extremely dangerous levels, some two and three 
times above the acceptable level," Aridjis said. 
"This winter is very bad," added Guerra. "If it continues, it could become the 
worst winter yet." 
