COLUMN ONE; 
CLEAN AIR QUEST -- AN INSIDE JOB; 
WHEN IT COMES TO HUMAN HEALTH, POLLUTION IN HOMES AND OFFICES MAY BE THE 
GREATEST THREAT. 
Ever since Congress passed the Clean Air Act in 1970, the nation has marshaled 
its political, economic and technological forces to rid the skies of 
health-threatening air pollution. 
Billions of dollars have been spent to control emissions from motor vehicles, 
factories, refineries and power plants. Still stricter standards are planned. 
Yet, for all the efforts to restore blue skies to the nation's smoggiest 
cities, a growing body of scientific evidence suggests that when it comes to 
human health, indoor contaminants may pose the most pervasive air pollution 
threat of all. 
Concentrations of some toxic, cancer-causing and mutagenic pollutants found 
indoors are up to 100 times greater indoors than they are outdoors. They far 
exceed limits placed on the same pollutants in outdoor air by the federal Clean 
Air Act. 
From tobacco smoke and radioactive radon gas to molds, fungi, combustion 
products and everyday household products like air fresheners and pesticides, 
humans are being exposed in their homes, offices and vehicles to thousands of 
chemical and biological agents. 
Couple these concentrations with the fact that most people spend between 80% to 
90% of their time in increasingly tight energy-efficient buildings, and indoor 
pollution becomes especially worrisome. 
How worrisome remains an open question. Aside from the severe effects of indoor 
pollutants like asbestos, lead and carbon monoxide, little is known about the 
health threat posed by other pollutants commonly found in homes and offices. 
Still, scientists say that it is reasonable to conclude that as exposures 
increase indoors, so do the risks. 
"Sufficient evidence exists to conclude that indoor air pollution represents a 
major portion of the public's exposure to air pollution and may pose serious 
acute and chronic health risks," the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency said 
in a report to Congress earlier this year. 
Estimates by some individual researchers indicate that indoor pollution could 
rank among the top 10 causes of death in the United States. 
Scientists for years have appealed to the EPA for greater attention to indoor 
pollution issues. Their pleas have met with little success. During the Reagan 
Administration, EPA requests for research funds were repeatedly reduced, and 
the Bush Administration has allowed only modest increases. 
While the EPA staff has estimated that $20 million a year would be needed for 
indoor air pollution research -- the figure now proposed in legislation by 
Senate Majority Leader George J. Mitchell (D-Me.) and Rep. Joseph Kennedy 
(D-Mass.) -- the Bush Administration this year is spending only $2.68 million. 
The Bush Administration opposes the Mitchell and Kennedy bills, which are 
scheduled for votes next year. 
Still, even with limited funds, the EPA is calling for studies to pin down the 
health effects of indoor pollution. It is also seeking ways to reduce indoor 
contaminants as well as a joint effort by government and industry to develop a 
voluntary program to upgrade building ventilation standards as well as building 
design, and improved operation and maintenance of heating, air conditioning and 
ventilation systems. 
In a report made public earlier this month, the EPA compared risks of 20 
different environmental problems. Radon, indoor air pollution and pesticide 
residues on foods pose the greatest health risk but received the least amount 
of federal spending on those problems, the report said. Toxic dumps and leaking 
underground gasoline storage tanks pose far less risk but receive the lion's 
share of money and attention from the EPA, the study said. 
"We concentrate on the big visible sources, chemical plants and oil refineries 
and outdoor air but the true exposures are the little things under your nose," 
said Lance Wallace, a leading authority on indoor pollution. Wallace, an EPA 
scientist, has pioneered studies aimed at determining the "total exposure" to 
pollutants from all sources, both outdoor and indoor. 
The EPA has estimated that indoor pollution may cost "tens of billions" of 
dollars annually when medical spending and lost productivity are added up. The 
Consumer Federation of America has placed the costs as high as $100 billion a 
year. 
List of Dangers 
A bewildering array of organic compounds from household products form the 
catalogue of indoor pollution threats: 
* Asbestos, found in cement and insulation, can lead to lung cancer or 
asbestosis, a chronic lung ailment. Numerous asbestos-abatement programs are 
under way in schools and public buildings. In July, the EPA banned most 
remaining uses of asbestos. 
* Lead, which retards intellectual and emotional development in children, can 
be found in older plumbing and in household dust as old paint deteriorates or 
is chipped away during remodeling. 
* Radon, a radioactive gas, invades homes through cracks in the foundation and 
is the nation's second leading cause of lung cancer. It may be present at 
levels the EPA considers unsafe in as many as 12 million U.S. homes; levels 
have been found to be generally below EPA guidelines in Southern California. 
* Formaldehyde, a probable human cancer-causing agent, wafts from foam 
insulation, plywood and particle board. 
* Benzene, a known human carcinogen, is found in cigarette smoke and gasoline. 
* Nitrogen dioxide, carbon monoxide and fine particulates that can cause 
respiratory illnesses spew from kerosene heaters and unvented or poorly 
maintained gas appliances. 
* Chemicals that are known animal carcinogens or toxics are frequently found at 
very low levels in air fresheners, shoe polish, paints, printed materials, 
household cleaners, solvents, moth balls and dry-cleaned clothes. 
* An estimated 84% of U.S. households use home pesticides, many of which have 
never been tested to determine their health effects. 
The World Health Organization has estimated that up to 30% of new and remodeled 
buildings may be plagued by indoor air quality problems -- an estimate borne 
out by widespread reports of "sick building" illnesses, including government 
workers at the EPA's own headquarters in Washington. In California alone, there 
are 700 sick building reports a year. 
EPA researchers have theorized that -- based on available data -- indoor 
pollution, including second-hand tobacco smoke, may account for up to 11,400 
deaths each year. Radon exposures may result in anywhere from 3,000 to 20,000 
additional deaths. 
Up to an estimated 30,000 additional deaths annually have been attributed by 
one scientist, Harriet Burge of the University of Michigan, to legionella 
bacteria that thrive in poorly maintained hospital systems for hot water, 
heating, air conditioning and ventilation. 
But even if far fewer cancers are caused by indoor pollutants than EPA 
estimates suggest, there remains cause for concern. 
Many researchers believe that the greatest and most costly problem posed by 
indoor pollution may well be the chronic, non-cancerous but debilitating health 
effects that result in higher medical costs, absenteeism and reduced 
productivity in the workplace. 
Few today say that efforts to control outdoor air pollution are unimportant or 
that they must stop. But a growing number of scientists say the threat to human 
health from indoor pollution can no longer be ignored. 
"If we measured outdoors what we are measuring indoors, there would be a 
tremendous hue and cry to clean up outdoor air," Wallace said. 
The embryonic indoor air pollution programs of both the state and federal 
governments pale in significance when compared to spending on other 
environmental health problems. In California, while radon tied with worker 
exposure to hazardous chemicals as the No. 1 cancer risk, it ranked last in 
state spending on 25 environmental problems as recently as two years ago. 
Likewise, all other indoor air pollution ranked fourth on the list of cancer 
risks, but 11th in spending among the 25 environmental problems. 
As early as 1981, the National Academy of Sciences described indoor air 
pollution as a potentially significant human health problem. It called for a 
wide-ranging research effort. But it wasn't until 1985 that the magnitude of 
the indoor pollution threat became readily apparent. A five-year EPA study 
surveyed 600 individuals in six cities to find out what their exposure was to 
20 different chemicals, some of which have been linked with cancer and birth 
defects. 
Researchers were startled by the findings. It did not matter whether the study 
participants lived in the Los Angeles area next to an oil refinery or in a 
pristine rural setting. Indoor concentrations of the 20 chemical compounds 
studied were almost always higher, often by as much as 10 times or more, than 
they were outdoors. Peak concentrations in some homes were 200 to 500 times 
higher than outdoors. 
Indoor Sources 
Blood samples and breath tests revealed that participants from rural areas were 
burdened with as much chemical contaminants in their systems as urban dwellers 
-- a fact that researchers said could only point to indoor sources of pollution 
common in every household. 
The study's findings left questions that must still be resolved: 
Are higher exposures indoors necessarily dangerous? What are the cumulative and 
synergistic effects, if any, of simultaneous exposures to more than 600 
compounds from building materials and household products found in homes? 
Are health risks too high or are they comparable to everyday risks that most 
people take for granted, like driving on a freeway? Will serious health effects 
take years to show up, as proved to be the case with asbestos? Can it be 
reasonably assumed that because high doses of some pollutants produce 
unquestionable adverse health effects in animals that the low-level exposures 
that most humans experience indoors are also harmful? 
What is clear is that the elderly, young children and those who suffer from 
respiratory problems or are chemically sensitive are particularly vulnerable to 
indoor contaminants. 
Studies in the United States and Britain have found, for example, that children 
who are exposed to elevated levels of nitrogen dioxide, a combustion product 
emitted by kerosene heaters and gas appliances, had more than twice the 
incidence of respiratory illness as children who were not exposed. Their 
symptoms included fever, chest pain, productive cough, wheeze, chest cold, 
physician-diagnosed bronchitis, physician-diagnosed pneumonia and asthma. 
Benzene, a known human carcinogen, has been found in far higher concentrations 
indoors than outdoors. In Los Angeles, the EPA found that 71.2% of exposure to 
benzene occurred indoors. Benzene is emitted by synthetic fibers, plastics and 
some cleaning solutions. It is also present in gasoline fumes and cigarette 
smoke. 
Wallace said that 37 participants in the air pollution exposure studies who 
filled their own gasoline tanks at self-service pumps had twice as much benzene 
in their breath two to five hours after filling up the gas tank as 300 other 
participants who did not fill their own tanks. But Wallace added that "the most 
important exposure to benzene is cigarettes." 
Cigarette Smoke 
Benzene levels in homes with smokers were 30% to 50% higher than in nonsmoking 
households. Smokers and those around them are exposed to an estimated 4,600 
chemical constituents in cigarette smoke, a number of them cancer-causing. 
Various studies have estimated that environmental tobacco smoke may account for 
upwards of 5,000 deaths a year among nonsmokers. 
Indeed, EPA scientist James L. Repace has said that the risks of indoor air 
pollution from tobacco smoke to nonsmokers are almost twice as great as from 
radon gas, and more than a hundred times as great as the total death rate from 
all cancer-causing hazardous outdoor air pollutants regulated by the EPA under 
the Clean Air Act. 
Scientists have noted that a 1985 study published by the American Journal of 
Public Health showed "significant increases" in deaths due to leukemia and 
lymphomas among people who were exposed as children to parental smoking. 
Each year, there are 200,000 emergency room admissions due to allergies and a 
third of them are believed to be caused by microbiologicals contaminants found 
indoors, according to Burge, the director of the University of Michigan's 
allergy research laboratories at Ann Arbor. "We know that microbial 
contamination exists. We know that it causes disease and without a doubt it 
causes a significant number of lost work days at a cost to society," said 
Burge. 
Sources of Peril 
Biological contaminants can thrive in building ventilation systems that are 
poorly maintained or designed. They can also proliferate in hot water systems 
if the water is not kept at temperatures of at least 113 degrees Fahrenheit. 
Porous insulation and filters combined with excessive humidity make for an 
ideal growing medium for microbiologicals. 
Formaldehyde, which is widely used in building materials and furnishings, can 
cause eye, nose and throat irritation, coughing, skin rashes, headaches, 
dizziness, nausea, vomiting and nosebleeds. It also causes nasal cancer in rats 
and is thus a suspected human carcinogen. 
Generally, the newer the building material or furnishings, the higher the 
formaldehyde gas emissions. High temperatures and humidity can compound the 
problem. 
Today, most pressed-wood product manufacturers have taken steps to lower 
concentrations of formaldehyde to acceptable levels, even in mobile homes where 
the problem was once greatest. But researchers continue to find a 10-fold 
difference in emission from identical products produced by different 
manufacturers. Carpet makers stopped using formaldehyde in 1981. 
Also of special concern is methylene chloride, which can produce cancer in 
animals and is widely used in paint removers and as a propellant in aerosol 
spray paint and can affect oxygen uptake in the blood like carbon monoxide. 
Some half billion pounds are produced annually, and half of that goes into 
consumer products. 
"I think we have every right to be concerned about some of the consumer 
products that are used," said John Girman of the California Department of 
Health Services, referring to methylene chloride. 
Air refresheners used in rooms, cars, diaper pails and toilets are also of 
concern. Many of these products use p-Dichlorobenzene or limonene, both of 
which have been found to cause cancer in animals. 
The EPA's Wallace said his studies found that these two chemicals accounted for 
the greatest risk of cancer among 45 indoor air organic chemicals. 
A good deal of scientific uncertainity exists over what, if any, the effects of 
long-term exposure to p-Dichlorobenzene may be, but the EPA said it would be 
"prudent" to avoid non-essential consumer products containing the chemical. 
Behavior Changes 
While the actual health threats of many indoor contaminants are not known, 
reducing or eliminating exposure to them in many cases is fairly 
straightforward. It could involve changes in behavior as obvious as stopping 
smoking (or only smoking outdoors) or making certain that ventilation systems 
are properly maintained and operated. 
"To get substantial reductions, you don't have to go off in the woods and eat 
nuts and berries," said John Holmes, chief of the California Air Resource 
Board's research division. 
Ordinary house plants can help, a study by the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration found. The study said that philodendrons, spider plants and the 
golden pothos were most effective at absorbing formaldehyde, while flowers like 
the gerbera daisy and chrysanthemums were best at reducing levels of benzene. 
Bamboo palm, English ivy, peace lily, mother-in-law's tongue and Chinese 
evergreen also proved to be effective air purifiers, the study said. 
Consumers can substitute safer products for those that give off toxic 
chemicals, and carefully follow directions on the use and storage of 
pesticides, paints and solvents. 
"In a large number of cases we see it's going to be pretty much up to 
individuals to make their own choices as to what steps they should or shouldn't 
take to reduce their exposure to indoor air pollution," said Robert Axelrad, 
director of the EPA's indoor air division. 
"These kinds of health risks have been there all along. We just haven't 
realized it," said Holmes. "But slowly we're getting the results from what is a 
gigantic experiment. As it becomes clear what the risks are, at least on a 
selective basis, society will move to reduce or severely limit those risks." 
AIR POLLUTION SOURCES IN THE HOME 
Concentrations of some airborne pollutants have been found to be up to 100 
times greater indoors than outdoors. Scientists say much remains to be learned 
about the health effects of indoor air pollution. But they agree that higher 
pollution levels indoors mean higher health risks. Following is a list of air 
pollutants commonly found in homes and offices and what can be done to reduce 
exposures. 
A pamphlet, "Inside Story: Guide to Indoor Pollution," is available from the 
EPA Information Center, PM-211B, 401 M Street SW, Washington, D.C. 20460; 
phone: (202) 382-2080. 
POLLUTANTS 
Radon 
SOURCES 
Uranium-bearing soil and rock beneath residences. 
HEALTH EFFECTS 
No immediate symptoms, but estimated to cause 10% of lung cancer deaths. 
Smokers are at higher risk. 
LEVELS IN HOMES 
National average is 1.5 picocuries per liter. 
STEPS TO REDUCE EXPOSURE 
Test your home for radon. Get professional advice in planning and carrying out 
radon-reduction measures if necessary. Ventilate crawl space. Smoking increases 
health risk from radon so stop smoking and discourage others from smoking, or 
smoke outdoors. 
POLLUTANTS 
Environmental tobacco smoke 
SOURCES 
Cigarette, pipe and cigar smoking. 
HEALTH EFFECTS 
Eye, nose and throat irritation; pneumonia. Increased risk of respiratory and 
ear infections in children. Can cause lung cancer and may contribute to heart 
disease. 
LEVELS IN HOMES 
Particle levels in homes without smokers are usually the same as outdoors. 
Homes with one or more smokers may have particle levels several times higher 
than outdoor levels. 
STEPS TO REDUCE EXPOSURE 
Stop smoking and discourage others from smoking, or smoke outdoors. 
Environmental tobacco smoke contains many compounds including benzopyrene, 
carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide and formaldehyde. 
POLLUTANTS 
Biologicals (house dust, insect parts, cat saliva, bacteria, molds; viruses) 
SOURCES 
Wet or moist walls, ceilings, carpets and furniture; poorly maintained 
humidifiers, dehumidifiers and air conditioners; bedding; household pets. 
HEALTH EFFECTS 
Eye, nose and throat irritation, shortness of breath, dizziness, lethargy, 
fever, digestive problems, asthma, influenza and other infectious diseases. 
LEVELS IN HOMES 
Indoor levels of pollen and fungi are lower than outdoors (except where indoor 
sources of fungi are present). Indoor levels of mites are higher than outdoor 
levels. 
STEPS TO REDUCE EXPOSURE 
Install and use fans vented to outdoors in kitchen and baths. Vent clothes 
dryers to outdoors. Ventilate attic and crawl spaces. Clean cool mist and 
ultrasonic humidifiers daily and use only distilled water in them. Empty water 
trays in humidifiers frequently. Clean and dry or remove water-damaged carpets. 
Use basements as living areas only if they are leakproof and have adequate 
ventilation. Use dehumidifiers if necessary to maintain humidity at 30% to 40%. 
POLLUTANTS 
Carbon monoxide 
SOURCES 
Unvented kerosene and gas heaters; leaking chimneys and furnaces; downdrafting 
from wood stoves and fireplaces; gas stoves; auto exhaust from attached 
garages; environmental tobacco smoke. 
HEALTH EFFECTS 
Impaired vision and coordination; headaches; fatigue; confusion; nausea. 
Flu-like symptoms that clear up after leaving the home. Fatal at high 
concentrations. 
LEVELS IN HOMES 
Average levels in homes vary from 0.5 to 5 ppm. Levels near well-adjusted gas 
stoves are often 5 to 15 ppm, and near poorly adjusted stoves may be 30 ppm or 
higher. 
STEPS TO REDUCE EXPOSURE 
Keep gas appliances properly adjusted. Vent outdoor heaters and furnaces to 
outdoors. Use proper fuel in kerosene space heaters; take outside to start and 
refuel. Use only in well-ventilated area. Install and use exhaust fan vented to 
outdoors over gas stoves. Choose properly sized wood stoves, equipped with 
pollution controls; make certain that doors on wood stoves fit tightly. Have 
annual inspection, cleaning and tune-up of central heating system (furnaces, 
flues and chimneys). Repair any leaks. Do not idle car inside attached garage. 
POLLUTANTS 
Nitrogen Dioxide 
SOURCES 
Unvented kerosene heaters, unvented gas stoves and heaters; environmental 
tobacco smoke; underground or attached garages; fireplaces. 
HEALTH EFFECTS 
Eye, nose and throat irritation; may cause impaired lung function and 
respiratory illness. 
LEVELS IN HOMES 
Average level in homes without combustion appliances is about half that 
outdoors. In homes with gas stoves, average concentrations over a 24-hour 
period range from .01 ppm to .13 ppm. Kerosene heaters and unvented gas space 
heaters may produce indoor levels from 0.1 ppm to 0.5 ppm. 
STEPS TO REDUCE EXPOSURE 
See steps under carbon monoxide 
POLLUTANTS 
Respirable Particles 
SOURCES 
Fireplaces, wood stoves, kerosene heaters; humidifiers; environmental tobacco 
smoke. 
HEALTH EFFECTS 
Eye, nose, and throat irritation; respiratory infections and bronchitis; lung 
cancer. Effects attributable to environmental tobacco smoke are listed above. 
LEVELS IN HOMES 
Particle levels in homes are typically the same as outdoors. 
STEPS TO REDUCE EXPOSURE 
Vent kerosene space heaters and all furnaces to outdoors; keep doors to rest of 
the house open when using unvented space heaters. Choose properly sized wood 
stoves equipped with pollution controls; make certain that doors on all wood 
stoves fit tightly. Have annual inspection of central heating system (furnaces, 
flues and chimneys). Repair any leaks that are found. Change filters on central 
heating and cooling systems and air cleaners according to manufacturer's 
directions. 
POLLUTANTS 
Household products 
SOURCES 
Paints, paint strippers and other solvents; aerosol sprays, cleaners, and 
disinfectants; moth repellents and air fresheners; stored fuel and automotive 
products; hobby supplies; dry-cleaned clothes. 
HEALTH EFFECTS 
Eye, nose and throat irritation; headaches, loss of coordination, nausea; 
damage to liver, kidney and central nervous system; some organics may cause 
cancer. 
LEVELS IN HOMES 
Levels of several organics average 2 to 5 times higher indoors than outdoors. 
During and for several hours after certain activities such as paint stripping, 
levels may be 1,000 times average outdoor levels. 
STEPS TO REDUCE EXPOSURE 
Follow manufacturer's directions carefully. Use outdoors or in well-ventilated 
places. Safely discard and dispose of any unused or little-used containers. If 
dry-cleaned clothes have strong odor, ask dry cleaner to dry them more or 
change dry cleaners. Keep indoor spaces well ventilated; minimize use of air 
fresheners. Keep clothes with moth repellents containing paradichlorobenzene 
tightly sealed in well-ventilated areas. Consider using cedar chips as moth 
repellents (if you are not sensitive to cedar oils.) 
POLLUTANTS 
Formaldehyde (an organic compound) 
SOURCES 
Pressed wood products (paneling, particle board, fiber board, plywood) and 
furniture made with pressed wood products; ureaformaldehyde foam insulation 
(known as UFFI). Drapes, carpets, other textiles and glues may contribute. Also 
combustion sources and environmental tobacco smoke. 
HEALTH EFFECTS 
Eye, nose and throat irritations; wheezing and coughing, fatigue, skin rash, 
severe allergic reactions. May cause cancer. May also cause effects listed 
under household products. 
LEVELS IN HOMES 
Average concentrations in older homes without UFFI are generally less than 0.1 
ppm. Homes with significant amounts of new pressed wood products can reach 
levels greater than 0.3 ppm. 
STEPS TO REDUCE EXPOSURE 
Use pressed wood products that are lower in formaldehyde emissions. 
(Manufacturers in recent years have reduced formaldehyde in these products). 
Apply lacquer or polyurethane coatings to pressed wood products. (Carefully 
follow manufacturer's directions when applying.) Use air-conditioning and 
dehumidifiers to maintain moderate temperatures and reduce humidity levels. 
Increase ventilation, particularly in new homes. 
POLLUTANTS 
Pesticides 
SOURCES 
Products sold to kill household and garden pests. 
HEALTH EFFECTS 
Irritation to eye, nose and throat; damage to central nervous system and 
kidneys; cancer. 
LEVELS IN HOMES 
Preliminary research shows widespread presence of pesticide residues in some 
homes. 
STEPS TO REDUCE EXPOSURE 
Use strictly according to manufacturer's directions. Mix or dilute outdoors. 
Apply only in recommended quantities. Increase ventilation when using indoors. 
Use non-chemical methods of pest control when possible. If you use a pest 
control company, select it carefully. Do not store unneeded pesticides inside 
home; dispose of unwanted containers safely. 
POLLUTANTS 
Asbestos 
SOURCES 
Brittle or damaged insulation, fire-proofing or acoustical materials. 
HEALTH EFFECTS 
No immediate symptoms. Chest and abdominal cancers and other lung diseases. 
Smokers are at higher risk of developing asbestos-induced cancer. 
LEVELS IN HOMES 
Elevated levels are found in homes where materials containing asbestos are 
deteriorating or damaged. 
STEPS TO REDUCE EXPOSURE 
Seek professional advice to identify problems. Do not disturb materials 
suspected of containing asbestos. Use certified contractors for asbestos 
removal or cleanup. Follow proper procedures in replacing wood stove door 
gaskets that may contain asbestos. 
POLLUTANTS 
Chloroform 
SOURCES 
Hot tap water (chlorine in water combines with organic solids to form 
chloroform, which vaporizes when heated). 
HEALTH EFFECTS 
No immediate symptoms. 
LEVELS IN HOMES 
Levels vary. 
STEPS TO REDUCE EXPOSURE 
Use warm instead of hot water in showering. Place an activated charcoal filter 
on the shower head. 
Source: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
