IMPLANT FUROR: HEALTH WARNING OR HYSTERIA? 
For years, Marie Walsh has watched her health deteriorate. She has been plagued 
by fatigue, abdominal pains, irregular menstrual periods and night sweats. 
Then one morning in February, 1984, she awoke to find the front of her 
nightgown damp with a bloody gel that had oozed from her left breast. A surgeon 
later found that an implant had ruptured, spilling silicone gel inside the 
breast cavity. He cleaned out as much gel as he could and put in a new implant. 
But Walsh's problems worsened. 
The Laguna Hills woman needed multiple surgeries to replace later implants that 
hardened uncomfortably and to remove silicone-filled tumors. She developed a 
variety of debilitating diseases: rheumatoid arthritis that made it painful for 
her to walk; scleroderma that tightened her skin and made her hollow-eyed; 
chronic lymph, kidney and liver problems. 
"I'm disintegrating," she says. "It's just a question of time (as to) what is 
going to go next." 
Walsh, 44, and her doctor are convinced that silicone gel from the implants has 
migrated through her body and caused chaos in her immune system. 
Earlier this year, Walsh won an $80,000 settlement against the manufacturer of 
the ruptured breast implant. That publicity has spun her into the center of an 
emerging nationwide network of women who allege that silicone implants, by far 
the most popular of breast-augmentation procedures, pose health hazards that 
are kept secret from consumers. 
She and other activists are crashing seminars on breast augmentation, courting 
newspaper and television reporters and filing lawsuits to draw attention to 
their claims. 
Breast-implant manufacturers and most plastic surgeons say such fears are 
irrational. They contend the devices' benefits -- primarily boosting a woman's 
self-esteem -- outweigh the risks, and they say there is no scientific evidence 
linking breast implants to cancer or diseases that attack the immune system. 
Dr. Garry Brody, a clinical professor of plastic surgery at the University of 
Southern California and chairman of the American Society of Plastic and 
Reconstructive Surgeons device council, complains that the Command Trust 
Network, a national women's educational group, discourages women who would 
benefit from breast implants by "spreading panic." 
Brody says USC is studying more than 3,000 women in Los Angeles County who have 
had silicone breast implants. So far he has found that they have no higher 
incidence of cancer than the general population. 
Still, breast implants have become increasingly controversial. 
Safety concerns have prompted the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and its 
Canadian counterpart to call for further investigations and to collect test 
data from manufacturers. 
Critics of breast implants have in their corner a Ralph Nader-founded advocate 
organization, Public Citizen Health Research Group, which has demanded that 
implants be taken off the market and has sued the FDA for access to 
manufacturers' records. 
The stakes are high. An estimated 2 million American women have had 
breast-implant surgery, which is performed about 130,000 times a year. About 
85% of breast implant procedures are done for cosmetic reasons alone; the rest 
are performed for reconstructions after mastectomy. 
Dr. William Shaw, chief of the division of plastic surgery at UCLA Medical 
Center, says of the controversy: "It could be a bigger problem waiting to be 
confirmed or a smaller problem with a great deal of hysteria." 
At the center of the controversy are devices that look like sacks, with a 
rubbery silicone skin and silicone gel filling. 
They were designed by two plastic surgeons from Houston who were looking for an 
alternative to plastic sponge implants. Used since the 1930s, sponge implants 
often made breasts very hard and frequently caused allergic reactions. 
Doctors also injected silicone liquid directly into women's breasts. In some 
cases, this caused severe health problems, and the FDA banned the procedure in 
the early 1960s. 
First used in 1963, silicone gel implants have become especially popular in 
recent years as fashion and films have played up the larger-breasted look. 
Advertisements in women's magazines and newspapers have enticed women with the 
purported ease of the implant procedure, which costs from $2,000 to $5,000. 
Silicone gel implants give a natural feeling to the breast; the sack is 
designed to prevent the gel from getting into tissue. 
Soon after its introduction, however, patients began complaining about buildup 
of scar tissue around the implant, making the breast hard and causing pain. 
This condition occurs in 30% to 50% of breast-implant patients, many of whom 
have repeated surgeries to try to correct it. 
And it is generally conceded that the implants can hamper efforts to detect 
breast cancer through mammography. 
Of far greater dispute is whether silicone gel, some of which leaks out of all 
implants, can damage a woman's health. While the medical community once 
considered silicone "inert" within the body, more recent research indicates 
otherwise. 
There is also concern about the polyurethane foam that surrounds one type of 
silicone implant. 
The foam, which is intended to reduce scarring, may break down in the body, and 
some studies have shown that under certain laboratory conditions, the 
disintegrating foam emits a chemical, diamino toluene (TDA), known to cause 
cancer in animals. 
The FDA is investigating these issues and demanding more information from 
manufacturers. Before a 1976 FDA amendment, devices such as silicone implants 
did not require federal approval or testing. 
The agency in 1988 determined that silicone gel implants pose "a potential 
unreasonable risk of injury"; it is still drafting the testing requirements for 
manufacturers. For now, the implants can be sold without passing any safety 
tests specified by the FDA. 
The FDA acknowledges that even if preliminary tests show the implants are safe, 
it may be 10 or 15 years before there is enough data to determine whether 
implants increase the risk of cancer or immune-system diseases. 
On Nov. 27, a District of Columbia federal district court ordered the FDA to 
release documents to Public Citizen Health Research Group from studies 
performed by Dow Corning Corp. during the last 25 years on the safety of 
silicone gel used in its implants. Dow is a major manufacturer of silicone 
gel-filled implants. 
Release of the information, however, has been stopped pending Dow's appeal. The 
company argues that the test data it gave to the FDA should be kept 
confidential, away from competitors; the FDA has not decided whether to join 
Dow Corning in the appeal. 
Robert Rylee, a Dow vice president, claims that competitors could use the test 
information to obtain FDA approval without performing their own expensive and 
time-consuming tests. Dow maintains it is sufficient for the FDA, "as the 
guardian of public health," to have the information. 
But Dr. Sidney Wolfe, the Public Citizen director, says he believes the public 
deserves "a glimpse at what the companies knew 10 or 20 years ago about the 
toxicity of silicone and silicone gel." 
Despite her lingering illnesses, Marie Walsh still has implants in her breasts. 
"Every doctor has told me it won't make a difference" in her health to remove 
them at this point, says the mother of eight. But recently, after consulting a 
new physician, Walsh decided she will have them taken out. 
"Her problem is induced by the silicone, and if she takes it out, there is at 
least a 50% chance that she will improve," says Dr. Gharoon Panahi, a 
Westminster rheumatologist. Panahi says he has six other patients with 
immune-system disorders who have breast implants. 
"I'd give anything to have my life back," says Walsh, who opted for an implant 
to correct a left breast that never fully developed. "I would rather be 
flat-chested and have my health and vitality." 
Walsh, who has been forced by ill health to quit a career in securities sales 
and go on permanent disability, now devotes much energy to organizing an Orange 
County support group for women with similar problems. 
She is assisted by Marsha Chambers, a Tustin woman who contacted Walsh after 
reading about her legal settlement. Chambers suffers from hepatitis and other 
ailments that she blames on her implants, which were removed in June. 
Together the women placed a tiny ad in a Tustin newspaper. It attracted 40 
other women who meet regularly to discuss their health problems and how to warn 
others about silicone implants. 
They have scoured medical libraries for information about implant hazards, and 
they show up at public seminars on breast augmentation to distribute flyers. 
Their group is linked to the Command Trust Network. The network was founded 
last year by Kathleen Anneken of Covington, Ky., and Sybil Goldrich of Beverly 
Hills, both of whom had a history of implant-related problems and a desire to 
reach out to others. 
"We decided an organization had to be established to provide the kind of 
information not routinely given in physicians' offices, but information that we 
believed was essential for a woman to make a completely informed decision about 
what she was putting in her body," Goldrich says. 
She complains that so far only Maryland has enacted state legislation requiring 
physicians to inform women, through a standardized brochure, of implant risks. 
Joseph Arcarese, director of the FDA's office of training and assistance for 
medical devices, says that an FDA advisory panel held hearings in 1988 and 
determined that "patients are poorly informed." 
In response to the panel's request, he says, the FDA has created committees 
representing consumers, physicians and the medical industry to write 
informational pamphlets for women considering breast enlargement or 
reconstruction after mastectomy. 
But so far, Arcarese says, members of the committees, which include 
representatives of Command Trust Network, can't agree on the content of the 
pamphlets, now in their fifth draft. 
In addition, a growing number of women with implant problems are suing 
manufacturers. The Public Citizen Health Research Group is acting as an 
informational clearinghouse for plaintiffs. 
The group estimates that at least 200 product-liability lawsuits are pending 
against manufacturers of silicone implants. 
In 1984, a federal court jury ordered Dow Corning Corp. of Midland, Mich., to 
pay $1.5 million in punitive damages and $211,000 in actual damages to Maria 
Stern, a Nevada mastectomy patient whose implants leaked silicone into her 
body. Before the case was heard on appeal, Stern and Dow settled. 
Dan Bolton, a Redwood City attorney who worked on the Stern case, says he has 
since taken on 10 to 15 cases of women with implant problems. In five of those 
cases, he says, the plaintiffs have received out-of-court payments to drop the 
litigation. So far, no cases have gone to trial. 
Bolton says that as part of such settlements, manufacturers routinely insist 
that the payment amount and the plaintiff's documents be sealed from the 
public. 
Advocates of implant safety say that lawsuits are triggered by greedy lawyers 
and a small group of hysterical women who are ill and looking for someone to 
blame. 
The American Society of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgeons recently reported 
the results of a survey of 592 women with implants. It showed that 92.5% were 
satisfied, and that 82% would, without a doubt, repeat surgery. 
And although a Dow Corning study linked silicone to cancerous growths in rats, 
the company and the FDA agree that the test produced a form of cancer to which 
humans would not be susceptible. 
"There is too much emotionalism that gets into this thing," says Dow Corning's 
Rylee. "What we really need is more understanding and true science." 
Rylee says Dow Corning is trying to develop a national epidemiology study to 
determine whether there is a link between silicone implants and immune-system 
disorders. A major difficulty, he says, is that the diseases in question -- 
lupus, scleroderma and rheumatoid arthritis -- have always been most prevalent 
in women ages 20 to 55, the most prominent implant group. 
"None of our scientific consultants or internal scientists or physicians have 
yet been able to show there is a causal relationship," Rylee says. 
The most controversial implants are those covered with polyurethane foam. They 
are marketed by Surgitek, a Paso Robles subsidiary of Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., 
the New York-based pharmaceutical and consumer-products giant. 
Garry L. Carter, vice president and general manager of Surgitek's plastic 
surgery division, says the polyurethane-coated implant "is probably the 
fastest-growing product in the industry," representing about 20% of all U.S. 
implant sales. 
However, Dr. Richard Caleel, president of the American Academy of Cosmetic 
Surgery, says: "There are a lot of cosmetic surgeons who do not use 
polyurethane-covered implants because they are not sure about what happens to 
the polyurethane." 
A study by Chris Batish, a biomaterials scientist and professor at the 
University of Florida, suggested that polyurethane used by Surgitek is not the 
best choice for medical applications because of its tendency to disintegrate in 
the body. Once that happens, Batish said in a recent interview, "no one is sure 
where it goes." 
In addition, Batish said he found that, in the laboratory, he could break the 
foam into chemical components, including the animal carcinogen TDA. 
Surgitek counters that laboratory conditions employed by Batish were harsher 
than conditions inside the body. The company says other studies that more 
closely approximate human biology show the foam breaks down very slowly and 
passes through the body without causing harm. 
Surgitek also says its research shows that the amount of TDA produced when the 
foam disintegrates is medically insignificant. 
The Canadian government recently conducted its own laboratory tests on the foam 
and found no release of TDA, says Irwin Hinberg, acting chief of the research 
and standards division of the country's Health Protection Branch. 
But, although neither that agency nor the FDA believes there is cause to outlaw 
polyurethane-coated implants, both advocate more studies. 
But a few doctors and scientists say there is more than enough information 
about implant dangers to raise a red flag. 
Dr. Douglas R. Shanklin, a pathologist at the University of Tennessee, calls 
the silicone implants a disaster waiting to happen. He says some women with 
implants "go five, 10, 15 years with no problem, and then all hell breaks 
loose." 
Shanklin says he has seen silicone in tissue taken from the thyroid glands and 
spleens of women with the implants. "I think they (implants) should be taken 
off the market pending resolution of these problems," he says. 
He adds that the various immune-system diseases reported by women can be 
serious: "These are fatal diseases in time. Lupus destroys the kidneys, and 
scleroderma can affect the heart and lungs." 
Michael Rensch, an assistant professor of engineering mechanics at the 
University of Nebraska, says he has examined over 500 deflated breast implants. 
"From all the pain and suffering I have seen, I wouldn't recommend anyone to 
use these devices from anyone or any company," Rensch says. 
In the last year, UCLA's Shaw says he has seen a dozen women with implants who 
also have arthritis and other immune-system diseases: 
"Right now, it is difficult to tell who has severe symptoms from the implants 
and who would have had them anyway. The causes of the diseases are a mystery. 
You have to admit it looks awfully suspicious. . . . This is a subject I think 
should be looked at. We shouldn't brush these people off." 
