'LOVE OBJECTS' SHINE BUT DO NOT INCLUDE ARTIST'S WHEELCHAIR 
When he left Mississippi in 1967, Geer Morton wanted to paint huge, angry 
murals protesting the racism he had witnessed there during two years of civil 
rights work. Police dogs attacking helpless black children, Southern whites 
brutalizing innocent black men and women. 
Morton's anger was, and still is, authentic. But violence and social comment 
never found a voice on his canvas. What flows more naturally from his brushes 
are the daily, commonplace wonders he calls "little love objects." A disorderly 
desk, a favorite rural porch view, garden roses on a Union Jack, an elderly 
neighbor. He exalts them on his canvasses like paeans to a lover. 
Bearded and bespectacled, Morton, 54, has gained increasing national 
recognition for his crude, color-splashed portrayals of those love objects, 
muscular paintings that seem to divulge more from a distance than up close. 
Shows in New York City, Los Angeles, San Francisco and Denver have all met with 
success. His latest paintings are on display through Saturday at Tarbox Gallery 
in La Jolla. 
But the one thing Morton has yet to paint is his wheelchair, which for nearly 
30 years has been more an object of his contempt than love. 
"It's certainly not a 'love object' yet," Morton said, sitting in his 
wheelchair outside his Mission Hills studio. 
An automobile accident at age 24 left both of Morton's legs paralyzed. Since 
then, he has shunned public use of his wheelchair, preferring to maneuver his 
lanky frame around on leg braces and forearm crutches. And, though he produces 
many of his paintings from his wheelchair, it has never accompanied him to any 
exhibit openings. The opening reception at Tarbox Gallery was no exception. 
"I think I wasn't friends with my wheelchair," Morton said. "I saw it as a 
symbol of being crippled, and I didn't want to look at that too often. I could 
face it for short periods of time. But there was a lot of resentment about 
that. Still is." 
Morton speaks mostly in the past tense because he is slowly loosening the knot 
of fear and bitterness that kept him from truly accepting his paralysis. Since 
his wife's death three years ago, Morton has been on a painful journey of 
self-discovery -- "in the pit of enormous change," as he put it -- from which 
his wife and years of alcoholism protected him. 
For starters, Morton abandoned alcohol. To the dismay of one New York art 
dealer, he even swore off making "booze paintings," still-lifes that include 
bottles of booze. A collection of 50 or 60 of the paintings sold quite well at 
the dealer's exhibit several years ago. 
Morton also has stopped avoiding people with severe physical disabilities. He 
recently joined the Challenge Center in El Cajon, a workout facility for the 
physically disabled. 
"I didn't want to identify, and now I do," he said. "I steered clear of 
(disabled people). I found other people's handicaps embarrassing. That's 
embarrassing to say." 
Morton's resentment over his disability didn't begin to melt until this year, 
when he saw a photograph of his studio taken by his companion, Joan Crone. With 
no prior arranging, Crone captured his empty wheelchair resting in the center 
of the studio near a self-portrait. The wheelchair seemed as much Morton as his 
physical self. 
"That startled me, and yet I was touched by it," he said. "It was a statement 
of acceptance. . . . Seeing the photograph was a gift to me." 
Oddly, Morton never would have become an artist were it not for the accident 
that put him in a wheelchair. At the time, he was studying politics and 
government at the University of Colorado, after three years in the Army. As an 
honors student he was able to audit any class he wanted; he found himself drawn 
to the art classes. He also discovered an enormous talent. 
Reevaluating his career after the accident, Morton decided to attend art school 
and pursue a profession in painting. 
"As long as I could walk and run and ski, and feel competitive, I could treat 
my talent as something superfluous, as a luxury, a bonus that could be spent or 
not spent," he said. "I had a sense afterwards that it was time I looked at 
that gift in a serious way." 
But very little in his life to that point had even hinted at a career in art. 
"If I had a list of 250 attractive occupations, painting wasn't on it," he 
said. 
Even after training at the prestigious San Francisco Art Institute, Morton 
never quite believed that painting had become his profession. Artists were 
flamboyant and bohemian, he thought, not conservative and introspective as he 
was. Artists lived in big cities, aggressively pursuing the artistic fads du 
jour. He lived in the Northern California countryside, toiling at his personal 
view of art. 
"It took me 20 years of being a practicing artist to call myself an artist," he 
said, dressed in his customary paint-speckled green fatigues and plaid flannel 
shirt. "I just never thought of myself as one. And I really still today don't 
think of myself as an artist. Finally, I call myself an artist because I know I 
am." 
Morton recently left his country home and studio to live part time in San 
Diego. He also spends several months a year in rural Maine, where he grew up. 
It was in Maine that his art career might have been preordained. His earliest 
memory there is of himself as a 1 1/2-year-old toddler staring awe-struck at 
the circles of sunshine glowing on the Oriental rug where he lay. 
"I'm still looking at the sun in that way," he said. "The shadows, and the 
combination of shots of sunlight surrounded by spots of shadow, are my earliest 
memories, and they're the subject of my work today." 
Light and shadow, space and tension -- those are the pieces of the puzzle 
Morton wrestles with in each painting. 
"Just like in our love lives, the interest for us is in the space between us," 
he said. "It's the space between objects, as the space between lovers, that 
makes life work." 
Eighteen years of life in the country gave Morton plenty of space to work with. 
There, he and his wife lived self-sufficiently, building their own house, 
raising sheep and other farm animals, bringing up three children. 
But the country never cultivated in him the patience that often accompanies a 
slower-paced rural life style. He paints speedily and rarely spends more than 
an afternoon on one painting. He hates to retouch a canvas, preferring instead 
to let the sensual image hang on its initial inspiration. 
"Like I'm a sloppy eater, I'm a sloppy painter," he said. "Things dribble here 
and there. It's not that I disregard neatness, it's that I'm in a hurry -- it 
takes one too much time and thought to be neat. The sun is always going down or 
the wind is blowing or I'm cold, or something." 
Morton can be as relentlessly critical of himself as he is of his work. 
Self-descriptions almost always yield a list of negative traits encased in a 
self-mocking sense of humor. He once likened himself to his 2-year-old 
grandson: "full of sound and fury, blubbering . . . bitching, grumbling, 
commenting on stuff, pointing and demanding . . . dropping stuff on the floor." 
Morton said he is trying to use the deeper self-revelations of the last couple 
of years to add intimacy and patience to his work, to remove more masks so that 
raw images and ideas will flow through him like a psychic medium onto the 
canvas. 
"I'm hoping that there will be an honesty in my work that was only there in 
unusual moments," he said. 
Already, people familiar with his work through the last two decades, say 
they've noticed his recent work blossoming like the idealized flowers he loves 
to paint. 
"His work always had sort of a very spontaneous quality, but it was a little 
moody," said Lisa Dubins, owner of Dubins Gallery in Los Angeles. "The mood 
seems more mature now. There's more of a confidence, though he was always a 
bold painter." 
So far, however, any new openness in his painting hasn't extended to his 
wheelchair. In attempting to explain why he hasn't yet painted it, Morton tried 
several avenues of escape. He doesn't want to clutter his work with irrelevant 
social comment. He doesn't often paint machines. Many of his inanimate subjects 
are antique. 
"Would I be more inclined to paint a 1910 wheelchair than a new one?" he asked, 
predicting the next question. "Nah, probably not." 
In the end, it came down to how Morton views his wheelchair -- both literally 
and figuratively. 
"So much of the pleasure of painting is being immersed in the pleasure of 
vision," he said. "With a scene I'd like to paint, I want to take it inside me. 
I want to reach out my arms, gather it all to me and make it part of myself." 
Objectively, he conceded that his wheelchair possesses the graceful curves and 
supple lines that he requires of his subjects. And he can see the way the soft 
San Diego sunlight reflects from its metal arms in a way that on any other 
subject might captivate him. But the thing is still too personally repugnant -- 
too much a symbol of limitations -- for him to visually appreciate. 
"I'm not sure what I want to think about my wheelchair at this point," he said. 
"These are very painful questions that I've been asking myself. I guess it's 
something to look at and do and see where it takes me. It would be a step." 
