WALESA HEADED FOR LANDSLIDE POLISH VICTORY 
Lech Walesa, the shipyard electrician who led Poland's fight against Communist 
rule for the last decade, was elected president Sunday by a landslide margin, 
according to partial, official returns that showed him winning by 77%. 
Exit polls projected that Walesa would maintain that 77%, decisively trouncing 
his mysterious dark-horse opponent, Polish emigre and Canadian businessman 
Stanislaw Tyminski. The exit polls projected a vote of 23% for Tyminski. 
It was the country's first popular presidential election. In free elections 
before World War II, Poland's presidents were always elected by Parliament. 
Among jubilant supporters at his hometown headquarters in Gdansk, Walesa, 47, 
and his wife Danuta, raised glasses of champagne. "I am aware that we face 
difficult tasks," Walesa said. "But if we managed to overcome the previous 
system without firing a shot, without blood being spilled, then we can dare to 
build another one. We have 10 years of experience." 
At his headquarters in Warsaw, Tyminski said he was "surprised" by the result. 
"I expected to get about 50%," he said. He also charged that the "situation was 
dangerous" and that his supporters were "terrorized" and "beaten up." 
Tyminski, 42, left Poland 21 years ago and established businesses in Canada and 
Peru. His second-place finish in the first round of voting two weeks ago, when 
he knocked Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki out of the running, threw a deep 
scare into the country's political establishment. In the ensuing campaign for 
Sunday's runoff election, Tyminski came under intense scrutiny over his alleged 
ties with former Communists and secret police operatives, his vague economic 
ideas and his assertions that mystical experiences among Peruvian Indians had 
given him access to a "fourth dimension" of reality. 
While Tyminski never explained how the "fourth dimension" might benefit Poland, 
commentators, noting his expressionless face and icy stare, suggested that he 
was adept at self-hypnosis. One British journalist called him "the candidate 
from 'Twin Peaks.' " 
The brief Tyminski phenomenon, which Walesa referred to as "an accident on the 
road to democracy," had the effect of pulling together, at least temporarily, 
the split factions of Solidarity, pulled asunder by the often bitter campaign 
battle between Mazowiecki and Walesa. Virtually all the important figures in 
the Mazowiecki camp, led by the prime minister himself, endorsed Walesa in the 
runoff. 
The triumph for Walesa is the culmination of a remarkable career. Born in a 
shack at the edge of a bog in northern Poland, one of seven children in his 
impoverished family, Walesa's formal education ended with a trade school course 
in auto mechanics. He left home at the age of 24 and went to work in the Lenin 
Shipyards in Gdansk. Within a short time, he was agitating against poor working 
conditions. He was fired from the shipyard in 1976 for criticizing the 
Communist unions, but he continued his agitations underground, convinced that 
it would be possible, one day, to organize free trade unions. The chance came 
in 1980, with the outbreak of a strike in the shipyard. In a move he refers to 
often, the unemployed Walesa jumped the shipyard fence to join the strikers. 
Within days, he was leading them. 
When Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski declared martial law in December, 1981, 
Solidarity was banned and Walesa was jailed for a year. In July, 1983, martial 
law was lifted. That same year, Walesa received the Nobel Peace Prize. 
Through most of the deep gloom that settled over Poland in the post-martial law 
period, scores of underground activists kept Solidarity alive, and Walesa, more 
than any other figure, was its voice to the outside world. Beginning with a 
series of strikes in 1988, Solidarity rose again, with Walesa leading a deft 
series of negotiations that legalized the trade union, thus setting the stage 
for elections that would spell doom for the Communists. 
In the aftermath of those elections, it was Walesa who pushed the cautious 
Solidarity brain trust, composed of Mazowiecki and other opposition 
intellectuals, to form a government. Walesa handpicked Mazowiecki to take the 
premiership. It was a step that foreshadowed six months of revolution in 
Eastern Europe in which hard-line Communist regimes surrendered power in 
Hungary, East Germany, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia and, finally, Romania. 
Causes of the Communist collapse included an apparently endless economic crisis 
and the reforms brought about by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev in the Soviet 
Union, although the determination of Walesa in Poland was seen as a major 
catalytic force. Walesa did not take a role in the new government and declined 
to run for Parliament, and it was obvious to Poles that Walesa was waiting for 
the presidency. Under the negotiated arrangement with the Communists, the 
presidency went to Jaruzelski, the former Communist Party leader. 
Back in Gdansk, Walesa's only official role was as the leader of Solidarity, 
but he acted very much as a president-in-waiting, receiving streams of visiting 
dignitaries, foreign ministers and heads of state. At the same time, 
Solidarity's liberal wing, most of it either in or close to the government, 
began sniping at Walesa as a "loose cannon" and an "autocrat," clearly aiming 
to ambush Walesa's obvious presidential ambitions, setting the stage for an 
acrimonious campaign that has taken up virtually the whole of this year. 
Walesa made "acceleration" his slogan for the campaign, arguing that the dead 
wood of Communist bureaucracy, still clogging the middle or upper-middle levels 
of industry and government, needs to be cleaned out. He painted his old ally, 
Mazowiecki, as dedicated but too cautious. 
It was a view the electorate appeared to share. Mazowiecki received only 17% of 
the vote in the first round, coming in third behind Tyminski. 
Walesa will now have the task of making good on his word to speed up Polish 
reforms, while laying to rest apprehensions over his autocratic style of 
leadership. Mazowiecki and other Solidarity liberals, forming a new alliance of 
political parties, have pledged to create a watchful opposition. 
Poland's new president could be sworn in as early as Wednesday. Jaruzelski, 
whose 1981 decree sent Walesa to jail for a year, would relinquish the post the 
moment Walesa is sworn in. 
