MARKETS / JOHN CRUDELE: ECONOMY WORRIES INVESTORS MORE THAN MIDEAST 
The battle lines are now drawn for the stock market. It's the economy versus 
the Middle East. And the economy is the favorite. 
The Dow Jones industrial index has rise nicely for the past several weeks, 
mainly because tensions in the Persian Gulf seem to have abated. But if you 
listened carefully, Wall Street gave off some very ominous noises. 
Take a look at how the overall stock market performed. And then take a look at 
the action of, say, IBM Corp.'s shares on one recent day. In those two 
instances, you'll see a conflict between what will probably be the two most 
powerful forces in the market during the next few months: the Middle East and 
the nation's weak economy. 
And Wall Street seems to be deciding that the economy's problems are too 
troublesome to ignore, even if the Middle East settles down. 
Stock prices started out sharply higher, for instance, on Dec. 6, the day that 
Iraq first made gestures toward releasing foreign hostages. For the first time 
in months, there was a bona fide reason to believe that war could be avoided in 
the Middle East. 
But stocks lost all of those early gains, and then some, mainly because 
investors became spooked about IBM's earnings. IBM shares, which have been on a 
winning streak of late, ended that day sharply lower and dragged down the rest 
of the market. 
Even more troublesome, some experts say, was the fact that there was no bad 
news about IBM's earnings -- only rumors. 
In its reaction to the IBM rumor, some experts think that the stock market was 
clearly showing a bias toward corporate profits and the economy as the most 
important issues for the remainder of 1990 and into January. Easing tensions in 
the Middle East -- although a good excuse for an occasional short-term rally -- 
aren't enough to boost share prices much more over the longer term. 
These experts believe that any extended rally for the stock market will 
probably be delayed until lower oil prices, lower interest rates or something 
else starts to have a noticeable effect on reviving the economy. 
Corporate earnings are expected to be lousy in the current quarter. And news 
like that doesn't often wait to be announced. So stock prices are likely to be 
under pressure from economic factors well before companies start officially 
reporting their earnings in mid-January. 
The Federal Reserve Board has sliced interest rates during the past few weeks, 
and a drop in the nation's discount rate could come any day. The Fed even took 
the extremely bold step of reducing the percentage of certain deposits that 
banks must hold as reserves. 
Although this last move could boost bank profits (perhaps by $1 billion for 
money center banks), the real question is: Will it succeed in the intended 
purpose of stimulating lending? "I have spoken to maybe 100 banks, and the 
answer is no," says Hugh Johnson, a stock market strategist for First Albany 
Corp. 
Even if banks decide to lend money more freely, the other big unknown is 
whether consumers and corporations are willing to borrow. Corporate debt has 
soared through the 1980s, and most experts believe that companies won't be too 
eager to borrow money while business conditions are still weak. 
And consumers, says Albert Sindlinger, a pollster, won't take out loans just 
yet. "Consumers are not in a borrowing mood," he says. "I don't think consumers 
are interested in adding to their debt." 
If consumers and business don't borrow and banks don't lend, the nation's 
economy will continue to slip. And although the headline writers on the 
business pages won't completely ignore the Middle East situation, more 
attention will be paid to the economy. And that probably won't cheer up the 
stock market. 
Broker Wins Slander Claim Against Client 
Nobody knows what went through Freddie Klough's mind in late 1987, when he 
refused to pay Advest Inc. the $46,786 that the brokerage says he owed on his 
margin account. Perhaps he, like thousands of other American investors, simply 
felt cheated when his huge paper profits in the stock market turned to losses 
within 48 hours. 
In any event, Klough -- not his real name -- did refuse to come up with the 
money, and he, like many investors at the time, complained about the way his 
accounts were handled by Advest. The Klough case has since become one of the 
most extraordinary arbitration cases between an investor and a brokerage that 
anyone can remember. 
Now, after crawling its way for three years through the courts and the New York 
Stock Exchange's arbitration process, this unusual case is finally complete. 
The verdict: Not only did Klough end up paying the $46,786 to Advest, but this 
month he was also ordered to give an additional $189,000 in punitive damages to 
George Guttman, an Advest broker. Guttman, in a counterclaim to the 
arbitrators, said Klough's complaints were libelous and slanderous and had 
deprived him of his livelihood. 
The underlying facts of Klough's case are straightforward -- as most 
arbitrations are. Klough, through broker Guttman, made many dozens of trades 
during 1987 and before. He purchased numerous different stocks and "shorted" 
many others. Put and call options were also purchased in his own account and in 
his 90-year-old mother's account, which Klough supervised. 
When the market collapsed and his accounts were picked clean, Klough contended 
that he hadn't known what was going on. He alleged that Guttman churned the 
accounts -- making unnecessary trades to generate more commissions. After 
complaining directly to Hartford, Conn.-based Advest, Klough said he didn't owe 
the brokerage anything. 
Advest and Guttman, on the other hand, argued that Klough was an experienced 
investor who should have known the risks involved in the trading tactics that 
were being undertaken. And the broker and his firm maintained that they were 
unaware of the age of Klough's mother because Klough withheld the information. 
Those sorts of facts would usually add up to a routine arbitration case. The 
panel would ordinarily decide whether Advest adhered to the "know-your-client" 
rule of thumb and allowed Klough to engage only in trading that was appropriate 
for him. If it were appropriate, Klough would have to pay the money. If it 
weren't, Advest would have to eat the loss. 
But there was a twist to this case: Guttman, who left Advest after Klough's 
accusations, charged that his former client had ruined his ability to work in 
the brokerage industry. For that, Guttman told the arbitration panel, he wanted 
Klough to pay. 
And Guttman got his revenge. In the next few weeks, Guttman's attorney will 
probably collect the $189,000 that the arbitration panel awarded the broker 
many months ago. 
"The broker part of it, yeah, it was unusual," says Jeffrey More, a lawyer for 
Coleman &amp; Rhine, which represented Advest -- but not Guttman -- in the 
proceeding. 
Most investors unknowingly give up their right to sue a brokerage in court when 
they fill out those forms opening an account. Instead, they agree to have 
disputes settled in front of an arbitration panel, such as the three-member one 
that heard Klough's complaint against Advest. 
The arbitration process is usually relatively simple. An investor fills out 
some forms, telling the arbitrators his complaint. A hearing is set, during 
which both sides present their evidence. After a few months, the arbitrators 
decide who's right and who's wrong. 
But Klough's case consumed nine days of hearings, during which minute details 
of trading in Klough's accounts were examined. Klough himself spent 10 hours 
under cross-examination. 
According to the best available information, Klough has been devastated by the 
arbitrators' decision, as well as by the recent death of his mother. I changed 
his name -- but not the names of the other participants -- to spare the 
investor more hardship while still being able to tell about this unusual case. 
For the record, Klough did not respond to a regular letter I sent him, and he 
didn't accept a letter sent by certified mail. He is said to have shut off his 
telephone (as well as some other utilities to his New York City apartment), and 
he didn't respond to several telephone messages left with the management of his 
building. 
"It's a sad case," says Charles Hecht, a lawyer who represented Klough until he 
resigned halfway through the case. "He got a raw deal. But to an extent, he 
brought a lot of it on himself." 
Hecht, the second lawyer on the case, says he quit because of "irreconcilable 
differences" with his client. He wouldn't give details, citing attorney-client 
privileges. Klough, who has legal experience but isn't a lawyer, handled the 
case himself after Hecht's departure. 
"As far as the facts go and how this guy was treated, it was an outrage," says 
Hecht, who still contends that Klough's account and that of his mother were 
traded "irrationally." 
Klough spent days on the stand trying to persuade arbitrators that he was a 
novice in the ways of stock trading -- even though he had an account as early 
as 1983 with Muriel Siebert &amp; Co., a small brokerage whose clients make 
most of their own investment decisions. 
Even though he said he wanted his family's funds invested in safe, blue chip 
stocks with good earnings, Klough's first foray into risky options trades 
occurred in 1983, according to testimony. By 1986, Klough was taking tax 
deductions for investment publications, but he claimed not to understand the 
concept of a "short squeeze" when shares of the Korean Fund suddenly started 
collapsing that year. 
After the 1987 crash, Klough purchased E. F. Hutton &amp; Co. stock because he 
hoped that the brokerage would be taken over. But Klough told the arbitrators 
that he would not have bought the shares if he thought they would go down in 
price. 
Ultimately, the arbitrators ruled against him and ordered him to pay Advest the 
money. But the most surprising aspect of the case to many observers is that the 
panel also ruled that the accusations that Klough made to Advest against 
Guttman had harmed the broker. Advest contends that Guttman wasn't fired; 
Guttman says he was. 
Were these accusations -- which were actually contained initially in a letter 
from Klough's first lawyer to Advest -- any more damaging to the broker than, 
say, the complaints a customer would make to Sears Roebuck about a testy 
refrigerator salesman? 
Members of the panel were not available for comment but obviously thought that 
Klough was wrong. The NYSE says the panelists are not permitted to discuss 
their findings. 
Guttman's lawyer says that because any complaint against a broker goes on a 
permanent record and affects his ability to get a job, the differences between 
these and other types of consumer complaints are enormous. 
Mark J. Astarita, a partner in Gusrae Kaplan &amp; Bruno, the firm that 
represented Guttman, says Klough threatened Guttman. "He made good on those 
threats by incessant letter writing and telephone calls to Advest and 
regulatory authorities, and by filing one of the most baseless claims I have 
ever seen filed," says Astarita. Guttman hasn't been able to find work in the 
brokerage industry for three years, his attorney says. 
"The customer had managed his own accounts and his mother's accounts for years 
at a discount broker with great success," says Astarita. Only when the market 
turned against him did Klough decide to complain about Guttman. 
Astarita adds that Guttman was merely an order taker. "You can't go around 
making unsubstantiated claims against a broker or anyone else for that matter," 
says Astarita. That's why Guttman filed a counterclaim, the lawyer says. 
"At the time, it was the only counterclaim won against a customer by a broker 
that we were aware of," adds Astarita. 
