ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: COUNTYWIDE; 
LAST-DAY BLITZ FILLS MALL PARKING LOTS 
Orange County's malls were bustling with last-minute shoppers Monday, in the 
final and one of the busiest shopping days of an otherwise disappointing 
Christmas season for most merchants. 
Many workers had the day off or were given early leave, giving merchants hope 
that they would spend the day spending. The rush was also expected because of a 
trend in recent years toward late-season spending sprees. 
From the looks of the crowds, store owners were not disappointed. Parking lots 
reached capacity by midafternoon, with aisles packed with scurrying shoppers. 
More important, customers were buying instead of just looking, retailers said. 
Five weekends after Thanksgiving, it was finally shopping do or die: Buy it now 
or go without -- at least until the after-Christmas sales. 
Department store executives and owners of small shops hoped that the Christmas 
Eve rush would turn around the sales slump, which has been prompted by concerns 
about the economy and political uncertainty. 
While a strong showing in the last three days may not make the season a winner, 
at least it ended on an upbeat note. 
Amid worries about recession and war, the stores that seemed busiest were often 
discounters or featuring lower-cost items. At the Topkapi store in Westminster 
Mall, shoppers stood five and six deep at times Monday to buy earrings and 
costume jewelry. 
"We were prepared for everything," said a self-assured sales clerk, Linh Huynh, 
as she restocked a shelf. 
Derek Adams, a salesman at the Organ Exchange, said he thought that Saturday 
looked busier than Monday. "It's a little slower today," he said. "People are 
probably buying a lot more groceries." 
He admitted that he was a last-minute shopper himself, planning to scrounge 
through the mall when he got off work to find gifts for his 9-month-old 
daughter and various nieces and nephews. 
Even at tony Fashion Island in Newport Beach, shoppers said they had economic 
concerns on their mind. 
Leah Vankirk, waiting for a cash register at a Doubleday Bookshop, said she was 
buying books and compact discs as presents this year instead of more expensive 
gifts. 
"It's a 'cutting-back' cost, and it's convenient for me to pick them up," she 
said. 
Business was also brisk at South Coast Plaza in Costa Mesa. At the exclusive 
Gucci store, sales picked up in the last two weeks, said Carlo Armenise, the 
store manager. He said he expects sales of the store's line of designer 
handbags and leather goods to outpace last year's. 
At Burberrys, known for its trench coats and other outerwear, manager Steve 
Miller said the last-minute sales flurry had been strong. The daily sales 
volume since Saturday had been roughly equal to about two to three weeks of 
sales the rest of the year. 
At Tiffany &amp; Co., fur-clad matrons hovered over glass cases filled with 
sparkling jewels. Sales there were up this season, especially in the last week, 
said Jo Ellen Qualls, Tiffany's vice president and manager. 
"Everybody's biting their finger until the last minute," she said. CHRIS 
WOODYARD and CRISTINA LEE 
