STAGE REVIEW; 
'EURYDICE': A WALTZ ON THE WILD SIDE 
Some theatrical pieces are like road maps. They show you exactly where you're 
going as you go. Others project you like a missile on a course you can tell 
little about. In such cases, it is usually best to let yourself go along for 
the ride and check out the map later. With any luck, it'll give you some idea 
of where you've been. 
So it is with Reza Abdoh's "The Hip-Hop Waltz of Eurydice" which opened 
Wednesday at the Los Angeles Theatre Center. A prerequisite is that you float 
along with the piece, not searching too deeply for meaning and especially not 
for logic. If you're game, if you're open to seeming and actual incoherence and 
chaos, if you can take nudity and strong, often raw, but almost always striking 
language and imagery, the completed journey will be staggering if not always as 
illuminating as Abdoh might like. Many of his symbols, analogies, references 
and cross-references remain private, caught in the undertow of his own River 
Styx -- his brooding creative juices. 
The pleasures (for some they will remain problems) are overwhelmingly visual. 
The characters are androgynous or aberrant. The acting and performing is 
superior. In the case of Alan Mandell as the puppetmaster of this menacing 
underworld, a sleazy blimp with a face full of warts, it is exceptional. The 
video projections by Adam Soch are -- as they should be -- disturbing and 
remarkable. 
Sets, costumes, makeup, sound, score and choreography unite under Abdoh's 
unblinking eye to reflect his abstruse but insistently single-minded vision. 
There is a there there, and it is reached not through the mind but through the 
senses. Anyone who appreciated Abdoh's "Minamata" at this theater last year 
will find "Hip-Hop" to be at once new and familiar territory. 
And just as seductive and impenetrable. The legend of Orpheus and Eurydice is 
buried very deep within the folds of this performance piece. The program offers 
subdivisions that acknowledge the legend. (Orpheus' Nightmare, Murder of 
Eurydice, Passage Through the Elysian Sea, the Underworld). But were it not for 
that, the title and the recurring tug of love and war between Tommy/Orpheus 
(Julia Mengers) and Dora Lee/Eurydice (Tom Fitzpatrick) -- the genders are 
intentionally reversed -- it would remain unrecognizable. The Captain could be 
any boss, authority figure, prison warden or tyrant. 
Yet the events that unravel on Timian Alsaker's sullied set -- a dreary, 
water-stained, high-ceilinged cell with a bed and what is by turns a window and 
a video screen -- communicate effortless menace. 
Props roll in and out or drop from the grid. They range from oversized 
phalluses to food and a motorcycle, from instruments of torture to musical 
instruments (including the staff and gourd, attributes of pilgrim saints). 
By far the most compelling visions occur on video, however, from 
Orpheus/Tommy's frantic motorcycle race on a highway of death, to exploding 
Statues of Liberty, the decapitation of animals, the torture of people and 
political superimpositions that send potent anti-censorship messages -- 
including maggots that eat away at a portrait of Jesse Helms and a naked 
dancing male body attached to the head of President Bush. 
Not for the faint of heart. 
A program note suggests that "Hip-Hop" is the offshoot of an actual nightmare: 
"Abdoh visualized an Orwellian society in the 21st Century where sex is 
punished by death. He heard a monstrous vice cop scream at a married couple 
named Orpheus and Eurydice, 'We're gonna bore desire right out of you.' " This 
is now a line in the piece. 
Among his influences are Rilke's "Sonnets to Orpheus," the movie "Blood Feast," 
Japanese Kabuki, Brazilian capoeira (a martial dance), Jasper Johns, Marcel 
Duchamp, Francis Bacon, Virgil, Antonin Artaud, Bertolt Brecht, Jean Cocteau, 
and Karl and Groucho Marx. Eclectic hardly describes it. Unlisted but certainly 
also present is Hieronymous Bosch. 
There is a waltz. There is paradox. God, by any definition, is prominently 
invoked and sometimes repudiated. A kind of holy irreverence permeates the 
language. A dragon, symbol of Satan, is slain. A line recurs: "The place we rip 
open again and again that always heals, that's God" (Rilke). 
The final pastoral scene, intensely reminiscent of the one in "Minamata," 
exudes a disturbing kind of peace that slowly degenerates into an internal 
landscape of desolation, abandonment and fear. 
Puzzling, fragmented, hard-edged and brilliant as a diamond, "Hip-Hop" cannot 
be dismissed any more than "Minamata" could. It is enormously skillfull. Yet 
for all its amorphous genius, it exacts more admiration than passion. Perhaps 
that is a reflection of the world we live in. Or will live in. To quote another 
influence, the futurist J.G. Ballard, "In a completely sane world, madness is 
the only freedom." Whatever "Hip-Hop" is, it does not easily let you go. 
"The Hip-Hop Waltz of Eurydice," Los Angeles Theatre Center, 514 S. Spring St., 
Tuesdays-Sundays, 8 p.m.; matinees Saturdays-Sundays, 2 p.m. Ends Feb. 3. 
$22-$27; (213) 627-5599. Running time: 95 mins. 
