MOVIE REVIEW; 
'KILL-OFF' LOSES ITS LIFE TO SERIOUSNESS 
If excessive elaboration can kill a joke, excessive reverence can hurt a good, 
low-down story. In a way, that's what happens to "The Kill-Off" (Monica 
4-Plex). 
It's another Jim Thompson-derived movie, adapted from a terrifically grim 
little 1957 thriller. It has another of Thompson's memorably unsavory 
populations, growling and prowling through another brisk, dark saga of amoral 
cross-purposes, messy murder and the twisty stings of lust and greed. 
Superficially, it's a mean story about mostly mean people: bullies, drug 
addicts, bar people, thieves, strippers and blackmailers, in a disheveled 
little New Jersey vacation town just north of Asbury Park. All these messed-up 
lives, which coalesce around a vicious, bed-ridden old gossip named Luane 
Devore (Loretta Gross), are never prettied or brushed up. 
Writer-director Maggie Greenwald doesn't condescend to Thompson. She takes him 
seriously, understands that there is a tough but humanistic vision boiling 
under the bleak, hard surface: the hard-nosed, laconic chatter, the soured 
machismo. But maybe she "understands" it too well. 
Thompson, the ultimate example of a writer who concealed his art, is now 
routinely adapted by filmmakers who wear their art, and the writer's vaunted 
nihilism, on their sleeves. Sometimes that makes for good movies, like Bertrand 
Tavernier's "Coup de Torchon" (from "Pop. 1,280") and Stephen Frears' "The 
Grifters." But Greenwald obviously wants to give us Thompson straight up. And, 
if that's true, her shot glasses are too shiny, her bar is too bare and no one 
looks drunk enough. 
The movie doesn't wash us in the creamy lighting and flash stylistics of "After 
Dark, My Sweet" or "The Grifters," but it doesn't sneak up on us either. It's 
low-budget, done for about $1 million, but its terseness is studied, forced. 
Most of the interiors are staged on obvious, underdressed, nearly windowless 
sets, as if Greenwald was doing "The Iceman Cometh" -- a slogging, 
well-intentioned, off-Broadway production of it -- with the characters swimming 
in and out of the careful, shadowy compositions and studiously spacing out all 
their lines, pumping them up portentously and letting them echo in the dead 
air. 
There is a nice, grungy, tamped down feel to parts of "The Kill-Off." But I 
don't think it's either a good movie or a good approximation of the novel. It 
doesn't hurt, really, that Greenwald doesn't try to translate Thompson's flashy 
technical experiment here: He told the story, as William Faulkner did in "As I 
Lay Dying," in a series of dovetailing subjective narratives from a dozen 
characters. But she sacrifices the tautness of the structure and doesn't offer 
anything very interesting to replace it. 
"The Kill-Off" (rated R, for sex, language and violence) isn't a negligible 
movie. Greenwald is obviously an intelligent filmmaker. She has assembled a 
good cast of unknowns: Steve Monroe, as affable would-be wife-killer Ralph, and 
Andrew Lee Barrett and Jordan Fox, as a strung-out couple, stand out 
particularly. And, together with ex-U2 cameraman Declan Quinn, she has given 
this movie a nice, seedy, stylized look. But she hasn't given it any life. 
And, without the illusion of spontaneity, Thompson's fatalism becomes 
redundant. No one would ever mistake this movie for a Gold Medal Original, spun 
right off a '50s drugstore rack, and that's probably what's wrong with it. 
'The Kill-Off' 
Loretta Gross Luane Devore 
Jackson Sims Pete Pavlov 
Steve Monroe Ralph Devore 
Cathy Haase Danny Lee 
A Cabriolet presentation. Director/screenplay Maggie Greenwald. Producer Lydia 
Dean Pilcher. Executive producers Alexander W. Kogen Jr., Barry Tucker. 
Cinematographer Declan Quinn. Editor James Y. Kwei. Costumes Daryl Kerrigan. 
Music Evan Lurie. Production design Pamela Woodbridge. Running time: 1 hour, 30 
minutes. 
MPAA-rated: R (sex, violence, language). 
