KINGS WARM TO THE TASK, BEAT FLAMES IN OVERTIME; 
HOCKEY: DUCHESNE'S GOAL TIES IT IN LAST MINUTE OF REGULATION AND ROBITAILLE 
WINS IT IN EXTRA PERIOD, 4-3. 
The Kings were dropping faster than the temperature Thursday. 
Wayne Gretzky: Playing injured with a bruised calf. 
Tony Granato: On a plane home with a stomach injury. 
Tomas Sandstrom, Marty McSorley, Bob Halkidis and Rick Hayward and Frank 
Breault: All out hurt. 
Scott Bjugstad: Called up, suited up and gone with a sprained knee in the first 
period. 
Already in a 1-5-4 slump and coming into the home of the Smythe 
Division-leading Flames, the beat-up Kings figured to have about as much chance 
Thursday night as marathon runner in the streets of Calgary where the 
temperature was down to 36 below zero. 
And indeed, after 59 minutes, the Kings trailed the Flames by a goal. 
But in their biggest comeback of the season, the Kings, down by two goals at 
one point, got one from Steve Duchesne to tie with a minute to play and a goal 
from Luc Robitaille to win in overtime, 4-3, before a stunned Olympic 
Saddledome crowd of 20,132. 
"It was a big victory," an elated Robitaille said. "With so many of our guys 
missing, we wanted to show we're still pretty good. We played on pride." 
Ironically, it was Rick Wamsley, the Calgary goalie who has turned the Kings 
away so many times before, who lost the puck on both of the big scores. 
He had a lifetime record of 14-6 in the regular season against the Kings coming 
in and seemed to have his 15th victory in hand when Duchesne came skating down 
the left side, went around defender Al MacInnis and fired at the Calgary goal. 
Wamsley blocked the shot and came out of the net to clear it off the left 
boards. 
But he never saw Robitaille until it was too late. 
"I think I surprised him," Robitaille said. 
No kidding. 
The King wing stole the puck and fed it back out to Duchesne in the left 
circle. 
This time, the King defenseman didn't miss, not with Wamsley unable to recover 
and get back in goal. 
The puck slammed into the right side of the net for Duchesne's 10th goal. 
In the overtime, Coach Tom Webster, suddenly faced with the prospect of 
salvaging at least one point out of what had seemed like a disastrous night, 
played conservatively. 
But when the puck was shot out into the neutral zone, the Kings had their 
window of opportunity. 
Robitaille followed the puck across the red line, then across the blue line. 
Wamsley came out to meet him, a full 20 feet from the net. 
The Flames goalie reached the puck first, but instead of clearing it to the 
side, he shot it right onto Robitaille's stick. 
"I think Wayne put a glare in his eyes," Robitaille said with a wide grin on 
his face. 
That was in reference to a story earlier in the day in the Calgary Herald in 
which Wamsley had complained that the glare from Gretzky's new aluminum stick 
could be blinding on the ice. 
Wamsley later denied he had said that, but there was no denying his mistake at 
the end. 
Given the puck, Robitaille whizzed by Wamsley and was staring at an open net. 
He didn't stare long, smashing in his 17th goal with 1:17 left in the overtime 
to boost the Kings' record to 18-10-5 and move them within three points of 
Calgary (20-12-4). 
The Kings' other goals were scored by Gretzky, (his 21st) and Todd Elik (10th). 
Calgary's goals came from Sergei Makarov (11th), Joe Nieuwendyk (20th) and 
Jamie Macoun (fifth). 
When it was over, the Kings headed out into the night to fly to their next game 
in Vancouver. 
It hadn't gotten any warmer, but for the Kings, it was like a day at the beach. 
King Notes 
Wing Tomas Sandstrom is not expected back until at least the second week in 
January, according to Coach Tom Webster. When Sandstrom fractured his back on 
Nov. 29, club officials said he could be back in a minimum of one to two weeks. 
Webster now concedes that was "very optimistic." Sandstrom has resumed skating. 
. . . Tony Granato flew home Thursday when it became difficult for him to 
breathe without pain. "I think I did it to myself," he said earlier in the day 
in describing the stomach injury. "I went to cross-check somebody (in the game 
at Edmonton Tuesday) and felt something pull. That was in the first period. We 
tried taping it, but it got worse and worse. I went out in the third period 
because I wasn't doing anybody any good by then." 
Frank Breault injured his knee in the Calgary game on Dec. 13. Arthroscopic 
surgery Wednesday revealed the extent of his injury, so Dr. Steve Lombardo 
proceeded with the major surgery that will keep Breault out nine months. . . . 
Defenseman Marty McSorley has been medically cleared to play, but has remained 
home because of continued soreness in the rib area. . . . Bob Halkidis has a 
knee injury, Rick Hayward a bad shoulder. . . . Unlike Scott Bjugstad, 
defenseman Brent Thompson didn't have far to go when the Kings called him up 
Wednesday. Thompson, a 19-year-old junior, plays for the Medicine Hat Tigers. 
But he was already in Calgary as a member of Canada's national junior team. 
Thompson was cut from the national team Tuesday, so he simply switched 
uniforms. . . . Garry Unger, who had served as interim head coach of the Kings' 
New Haven farm team, returns to his old job as an assistant coach with the 
Phoenix Roadrunners with the naming Wednesday of Pat Hickey and Nick Fotiu as 
co-coaches at New Haven. 
