ORANGE COUNTY; 
1990; 
THE YEAR IN REVIEW; 
OVERBUILT TO THE HILT, O.C. OFFICE SPACE GOES BEGGING 
Last month, a commercial real estate broker camped out in the lobby at Price 
Waterhouse for three hours until the partner in charge of the accounting firm's 
Newport Beach office agreed to see him. The broker had been told to stay all 
night if necessary. 
Price Waterhouse is leaving high-priced Newport Center and needs 40,000 square 
feet of office space, a sizable amount. So desperate are landlords to fill 
their empty buildings that the firm has been besieged with offers. (The broker, 
incidentally, didn't get a deal; Price Waterhouse had already narrowed its 
search to a few buildings.) 
Developers have built more than half of Orange County's 40 million square feet 
of first-class office space in the last five years. Eleven million square feet 
of it -- equal to 550 floors of the average high-rise office building -- sits 
vacant. 
Landlords charge rock-bottom rents, offer free parking, even part-ownership in 
the building -- anything to get tenants in the door. 
The construction boom was never totally driven by a need for all that space. 
The lenders simply had a lot of money to lend, and the development companies 
had grown so large that they had to either keep building or start to shrink. 
This year, however, the tidal wave of construction finally slowed. The money 
dried up after the thrift industry crashed and the banks came under the worried 
scrutiny of federal regulators. But it appears to be too late. At the rate 
tenants leased new space last year, it will take four years to fill all the 
empty office space on the market. And there was 3 million more feet under 
construction near the end of the year. 
"The whole thing's kind of scary," says Scott Perley, a commercial real estate 
broker. "The figures show that office space is still growing at 7% a year. But 
jobs in the service industries are only growing at 3%, and it'll probably be 
less next year." 
Meanwhile, real estate is such a large part of Orange County's economy that the 
construction slump promises to make the recession here that much deeper. 
Here's a look at how four people in four different parts of the real estate 
business are coping with the downturn: 
At the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers offices in a rundown 
Santa Ana neighborhood, Bob Balgenorth is thinking about the last recession, 
when home builders broke the construction unions in Orange County. 
Now construction is going down the tubes again and the big office and hotel 
projects that are the building unions' last toehold here are vanishing. Nine 
thousand construction workers lost their jobs in the last year, a big chunk of 
the 50,000 people unemployed in the county. 
Will the big construction companies take advantage of this recession to try to 
smash their unions, too? 
"Builders always kick that idea around," Balgenorth says. "The first thing that 
happens in a downturn is people say: 'Where can I cut costs? Can I cut out the 
union?' " 
The local IBEW is so weak compared to its counterparts in union towns such as 
New York that the 1,600-member local sometimes subsidizes part of its members' 
$24.90-an-hour wage so union contractors can bid for business as low as 
non-union contractors. 
That kind of thing, Balgenorth says, makes it harder to dislodge the local 
unions nowadays. 
Meanwhile, the places construction workers are likely to be looking for jobs in 
the next few years are in public-works programs such as highway construction, 
Balgenorth predicts. 
And on the bright side, the downturn may even bring local unions some new 
members, he says. 
"If you're working for a non-union guy for $12 an hour and he cuts your wage to 
$10, what are you going to do? 
"You're going to think about joining a union." 
Some people think it's significant that Ray Wirta, named president of the Koll 
Co. early this year, has spent much of his career in charge of managing 
buildings. 
For that, they say, is how Koll and other developers are going to earn most of 
their money for at least the next several years. 
Look at the figures: Last year Koll developed 3.5 million square feet of space, 
an amount equal to about a third of New York's giant twin World Trade Center 
towers, enough to make the Newport Beach-based company the biggest developer on 
the West Coast. 
This year, however, it was 3 million square feet. And next year, it'll be 1.5 
million, Wirta says. 
From his office on the top floor of Koll's sleek, three-story glass building, 
Wirta can look out on the urban canyons of the John Wayne Airport area, a 
neighborhood where only 20 years ago quail nested in open fields. 
Koll was the first big developer to see the potential in those fields. And it 
was one of the first to get rich partners -- insurance companies, savings and 
loans -- to put up all the money to build offices and warehouses, while Koll 
usually put only its expertise into the deal with little risk to itself. In 
this way, Koll and other companies used someone else's money to grow much 
larger than they could have otherwise. But they also helped build the glut of 
office space in places like Orange County. 
Now, some experts say that development companies such as Koll will eventually 
turn into just another type of service company, developing buildings for a fee 
for corporations planning to move into them. 
Not quite so, says Wirta, who predicts that the vacant offices and factories 
will fill up sooner than most people expect. That will mean new demand for the 
type of speculative buildings that Koll constructs with no particular tenant in 
mind, although probably less demand than in the past. 
"Most developers aren't interested in being employees," he says. "They're 
interested in the upside of building and owning real estate for themselves. 
"There'll always be those kinds of deals in this business," he adds. "After 
all, we're not building cars." 
A few miles down the San Diego Freeway, Dan Heinfeld shows a visitor the 
expansive view of the mountains from his new offices in an Irvine industrial 
park. 
LPA, an architectural firm, moved its sleek office furniture and drafting 
tables into the new building in May so that it would have room to expand. 
Instead, the firm laid off 15 of its 90 people over the next few months. 
The ripples from the construction slump are spreading to all sorts of other 
real estate businesses that once grew like weeds -- commercial brokerages, 
mortgage brokers, space-planning companies. 
Recently, jobs in the real estate industry stopped growing; in fact, they 
dropped by 400 or so in October, to 29,000. 
For the architects -- including LPA -- that means cutting fees to compete for a 
diminishing amount of work. 
But after the last recession, LPA began to branch out from designing "spec" 
buildings, risky projects built by developers who speculate that they will soon 
fill the building with tenants. 
Sometimes the new strategy backfired. For instance, LPA's first stab at an 
airport terminal -- at John Wayne Airport -- turned into a public relations 
disaster after millions of dollars in cost overruns. 
But now that there are far too many spec buildings sitting empty, and little 
reason to build more, diversification makes more sense. 
Taking up the slack are some projects that are smaller and less glamorous than 
a firm the size of LPA might have done in the past. The company is doing work 
for public agencies such as the state university system and city governments, 
which are more likely than private companies to build through a downturn. 
Says Heinfeld, president of the firm's Irvine office: "These days, there are 
very few of these jobs architects will turn up their noses at." 
A few months before the onset of a recession might not seem the best time to 
start a new company, but not, apparently, to Harold Street. In August, Street 
left the Koll Co. -- where he was a top executive for marketing and development 
-- to move around the corner into his own office. 
Now, he has hooked up with WSGP Partners L.P., a company started by former 
Treasury Secretary William Simon. WSGP used to be a financial partner with 
developers in building projects; now, it's turning into a buyer. 
WSGP has already rounded up Tokyo Fire &amp; Marine Casualty, the world's 
largest property and casualty insurance company, as a fellow investor. Street 
has a deal to raise hundreds of millions of dollars from Pacific Rim, European 
and American investors who might like to buy real estate over the next few 
years at bargain-basement prices. 
Why so cheap? One big reason: Thrifts that invested in real estate -- and must 
now sell within a few years under new federal regulations -- will be willing to 
make deals, Street says. Then there are the banks that will be foreclosing on 
buildings and will be anxious to get them off the books. 
And few buildings are being sold now, which means sellers will grow even more 
desperate. The Japanese, once big buyers, have troubles of their own with 
higher interest rates and declining real estate values at home. The big U.S. 
pension funds are waiting for prices to drop still further -- below what it 
would cost to build the buildings, real estate brokers say -- before scooping 
up values in what the industry calls "vulture" deals. 
"I'd advise people with capital to get ready for the period of the most 
opportunity I've ever seen," Street says, adding: 
"In another two years or so, there'll be an opportunity to acquire spectacular 
assets at historically low prices." 
Building Boom Goes Bust 
After the recession of the early 1980s, there was a big demand for office space 
in Orange County, and developers rushed to meet it, bringing more than 6 
million square feet of space under construction in 1984. The figure didn't dip 
below 4 million square feet until 1989, after which the office vacancy rate 
dropped into the low 20% range and has stayed there. New construction appears 
to be slowing, but so does absorption, or the amount of new space taken off the 
market each year by tenants. 
Vacant Square Feet 
In millions of square feet: 
'84: 2.4 
'85: 5.3 
'86: 6.4 
'87: 8.8 
'88: 9.7 
'89: 10.6 
'90*: 10.6 
Vacancy Rate 
'84: 12% 
'85: 23% 
'86: 24% 
'87: 23% 
'88: 23% 
'89: 21% 
'90*: 21% 
*Through September 1990 
Source: Grubb &amp; Ellis Orange County Research Services Group 
