STUDENT ACTIVISM WITHOUT BARRICADES; 
ABSENT GUNFIRE IN THE GULF, ABSENT A DRAFT, ABSENT BODY BAGS, AN ANTI-WAR 
MOVEMENT HAS JUMP-STARTED. 
If President Bush goes to war against Iraq, he should count on being shadowed 
by a large, angry anti-war movement. Students will not necessarily lead, but 
commentators who see nothing but Republicans and hear nothing but silence on 
campuses may be surprised by the level of student activism. 
The skeptics commonly invoke "the 1960s" as proof that today's students are 
largely apathetic. But they wrongly compare the uncertain pre-war present to 
the high tide of campus protest in 1967-70, when U.S. casualties in the Vietnam 
War numbered in the tens of thousands. The more appropriate comparison is 
between today and the period stretching from 1963 through early 1965, when some 
25,000 American "advisers" were in South Vietnam but the fighting was 
small-scale. 
In 1963, there was some campus unease: The National Student Assn. condemned the 
repressive policies of South Vietnamese Premier Ngo Dinh Diem and supported the 
self-immolating Buddhists. But anti-war demonstrations were few. The war was 
remote, the country unmobilized and students were exempt from the draft. Even 
the dubious Tonkin Gulf incident and President Lyndon B. Johnson's initial 
bombing of North Vietnam didn't inspire much protest. 
Not until the spring of 1965, after U.S. bombing of North Vietnam became 
routine, did college protest emerge as a regular feature of the political 
landscape. Even so, apathy on campus was the norm. That spring, though, 25,000 
students marched in Washington; teach-ins began at the University of Michigan 
and spread to dozens of campuses -- all at a time when students still felt 
insulated from the draft. 
From then on, military deployment and anti-war demonstrations escalated in 
parallel. By 1969, when most students were touched by the threat of the draft 
(vastly more than were actually drafted), and 500,000 American troops were 
deployed in Vietnam, the same number of protesters marched on Washington, 
joined by millions from around the country. 
What is striking is that today -- absent a draft, absent a shooting war, absent 
body bags -- an anti-war movement has jump-started. For all the hesitations and 
cross-currents, there is already more protest than meets most eyes, and in the 
wake of Bush's decision to double the size of the U.S. forces in the Persian 
Gulf, it has begun to cross the media threshold. 
Even before the President's decision, teach-ins were being reinvented, 
sometimes by veterans of the Vietnam teach-ins of 1965, sometimes by minority 
faculty, sometimes by students who had never heard the term. By now, teach-ins 
have brought out 1,200 students at UC Santa Barbara, 400 and then 500 at UC 
Davis, 300 and then 900 at UC Berkeley, 300 and another 500 at San Jose State, 
1,500 at the University of Michigan. Rallies have drawn 1,000 at Stanford and 
the University of Minnesota, 250 at Indiana, 100 at Chicago's Loyola and 50 at 
Texas A&amp;M -- where the managing editor of the student newspaper said that 
"the fact that it happened at all is pretty significant." In mid-October, there 
were anti-war demonstrations in 20 cities. Fifteen hundred signed an anti-war 
petition at Notre Dame. There have been anti-war vigils at Western Michigan 
University, hunger strikes at Juniata College in Pennsylvania and at Stanford. 
Perhaps the most remarkable protests have taken place at the University of 
Montana. On a cold and rainy Halloween, 600 students marched through downtown 
Missoula chanting, "Hell no, we won't go, we won't fight for Texaco," and 
singing, "Give Peace a Chance." Back on campus, they marched through school 
buildings and disrupted classes, sparking a controversy. But they also 
succeeded in getting a resolution through the student senate supporting 
negotiations in the Persian Gulf. 
The Montana anti-war coalition embraces pro-life as well as pro-choice groups 
(at one meeting, they both agreed to take down their signs), fraternities, 
Central American, black and women activists. It has already mobilized as high 
as percentage of students against war as at most campuses during most of the 
Vietnam War. The anti-war leaders have urged their people to send gifts to the 
soldiers camped in the Saudi desert -- a stunning turnabout from the '60s. 
What do these students want? The consensus is simple: No war; negotiate a 
settlement. 
"You can't believe the government," says Nicholas Tripcevich, 20, a journalism 
major. "They have ulterior motives." 
Lisa Parks, 23, a recent graduate and now a research assistant in political 
science, and one of the organizers of the protests, supports the U.N. economic 
embargo of Iraq but doesn't think "the U.S. should be policing the world." As 
for Saddam Hussein: "He is a fascist dictator, a torturer." But she is 
unequivocal about wanting the American troops out, perhaps to be replaced by 
U.N. forces. 
None of this is to say that the majority of students are anti-war -- or 
pro-war. While campus groups have organized to send gifts to the troops, few 
campuses have seen vociferous pro-war sentiment. The more common reactions are 
bafflement, concern, ambivalence, apprehension lest the draft return and 
annoyance that the prospect of war may disrupt personal plans. 
The prospect of war is not on every lip; as usual, many students do not follow 
the news much. "The thing that upsets me," says Rosa Ehrenreich, an organizer 
of Harvard protests, "is that Harvard students just aren't worried about the 
possibility of a war occurring. They say that Harvard students are the future 
leaders of the world, but I think it would be nice if they paid more attention 
to important world issues now." 
Where are the 1960s activists? Anti-war Vietnam vets mobilized quickly. Ron 
Kovic, the most celebrated, speaks at rallies and has taped an anti-war TV 
spot. On Dec. 3, 80 Bay Area anti-war veterans blocked morning traffic into the 
Alameda Air Station; 16 were arrested. Their coalition, which includes 
Republicans, continues and expands; future actions are planned. Veterans of the 
anti-war movement, many of them now faculty, have spoken at teach-ins and 
counseled students on tactics. Some parents have encouraged their student sons 
and/or daughters to take action. 
But many veterans of the '60s anti-war movement, especially men, were late to 
oppose the U.S. deployment in the gulf -- as long as it was small, tied to U.N. 
sanctions, nominally defensive and multilateral. Furthermore, the vicious 
Hussein could never be kindly old Uncle Saddam. Many former anti-war activists 
thus felt caught between paradigms -- wondering whether the closer analog was 
World War II or Vietnam, collective security or U.S. aggression. Protectiveness 
toward Israel played a part in muting protest as well. Some early protesters 
alienated potential support by refusing to condemn the seizure of Kuwait. 
But as the military deployment swells, especially after the midterm elections, 
many activists who had supported the defense of Saudi Arabia in August were 
changing their minds in November. If the U.S. objective was to stop aggression, 
they asked, why not keep up the sanctions, enforce them with troops under U.N. 
command and contain Hussein? 
As in Vietnam, it is not elite students, or their friends or relatives, who are 
slogging through the Arabian sand. But new anti-war fronts have mobilized, 
partly because of the changing profile of student activism since the '60s and 
partly because of the unisex and disproportionately black armed forces. Women 
and minorities are conspicuous in the anti-war leadership; so are students at 
non-elite colleges, where many reservists began to question the saintliness of 
U.S. foreign policy. 
The protests are centered in the West and Midwest, where anti-war sentiment 
traditionally ran strong before the Cold War. Still, today, a troubled economy 
discourages many students from stepping out of line. The prospect of war is not 
the same as war -- most students do not disrupt their lives because of even 
odds. But these factors will not keep the campuses from exploding if U.S. 
forces go to war. 
True, most students might well support the President in the early days of a 
shooting war -- just as most students supported Johnson's escalation in 1965. 
But if body bags start arriving at Dover Air Force Base, student bodies will 
quickly polarize, with the potential for violent clashes. Anti-war sentiment 
will mushroom, taking a variety and sometimes a muddle of forms -- pacifist, 
multilateralist, anti-imperialist, isolationist, even anti-Semitic 
(unfortunately, there are already those who mutter about the prospect of "Jew 
war"). 
Still, as in the mid-but-not-late '60s, most of today's student anti-warriors 
are sophisticated about cementing alliances on a single common principle: 
prevent war. Unlike their '60s counterparts, they start with the understanding 
that America is not their enemy (the public is divided about the wisdom of 
going to war in the gulf). Some radicals, meanwhile, want to seize the chance 
to change the overall political temper, but the majority of student activists 
will be content to secure peace. 
The Montana experience suggests how quickly militancy can escalate even on a 
campus where many, perhaps most, students are apathetic. And, of course, 
campuses will not be the only sites of protest. Minorities are already in 
evidence at anti-war rallies; churches will mobilize, too. 
Lisa Parks at Montana says: "I know a lot of people who are against the Bush 
Administration's deployment, but until an actual shot is fired, those people 
will not come out of their closets. 'I'm not going to demonstrate until people 
start dying' -- they've told me that. Which I think is idiocy. If we do go to a 
full-fledged war, it'll be interesting to see them join us." The Montana 
protesters already have a plan: As soon as the first shot is fired, boycott 
classes and march to City Hall. The same idea is circulating around the 
country. 
