HINTS FROM HELOISE: MAKE KITCHEN FESTIVE FOR HOLIDAYS 
DEAR HELOISE: I put up holiday decorations all over the house, but the kitchen 
always was left out. Since it's the activity center of our home, I had to keep 
the decorations simple, but I came up with a cute idea. 
I keep a small towel hanging on the door of the refrigerator for hand wiping, 
so I bought guest towels in red and green with Christmas motifs to use during 
the holidays. 
I also changed the magnets on the front of the refrigerator to some with 
Christmas symbols, and taped paper snowflakes on the cabinet doors. Now the 
kitchen is festive too. 
 -- MARY, Stephens, San Marcos, Tex. 
DEAR READERS: Winter may mean fewer fresh salad vegetables in the supermarket, 
but in their place you'll find the wonderful winter squashes. If you're not 
already familiar with these delicious, nutritious vegetables, here are a few 
tips about the different types to help you start enjoying them. 
The most widely available varieties are golden and green acorn squash, named 
for their acorn shape. Both are moist and have a nut-like taste; the golden are 
a little sweeter than the green. Buy green squashes that are dark gray-green 
with orange spots and golden ones that are a gold-orange without spots. 
Golden nugget squash is bright orange and looks like a tiny pumpkin about the 
size of an apple. That makes them just the right size for individual servings. 
They have a delightfully sweet taste. 
Butternut squash looks like a small gourd, pale golden-beige in color. They 
have a creamy, buttery-nutty flavor and the smaller ones are sweeter than the 
larger. 
Buttercup squash looks like it's wearing a light green turban. The body of the 
squash is a dark green with lighter stripes and grayish flecks. The flesh is 
slightly drier than other squashes, but still sweet and smooth. 
Our favorite is spaghetti squash. When cooked, it fluffs up into long, 
spaghetti-like strands. The larger the squash, the thicker the strands. Its 
mild flavor blends beautifully with any sauce, much like pasta does. Choose a 
spaghetti squash that's bright yellow or whitish-yellow. 
Buying and storing squash is really easy. Look for squash without blemishes and 
that feel firm; those that are heavy for their size have meatier insides. 
Because of their hard shells, winter squash will keep for up to three months if 
you store them in a cool, dark, well-ventilated place. Those with the stems 
still attached will stay fresh the longest. 
Cooking is easy too. They can be baked, boiled or steamed, and do great in the 
microwave, sliced or whole. Their sweet flavors make them great accompaniments 
for spicy meats. They can be served plain with a little butter or included in 
recipes for everything from side dishes to desserts. The seeds can be roasted 
and eaten for snacks or on salads and provide protein. 
All squashes are excellent sources of vitamins, especially A, and minerals. Add 
these nutritious treats to your menus for a change and enjoy the winter a 
little more. 
 -- HELOISE 
DEAR HELOISE: I hate to waste anything, so when lettuce looks a little limp, 
instead of throwing it out, I just remove the outer leaves, break it into 
quarters or large chunks and soak it in cold water for about a half hour. It'll 
be crisp and fresh again. 
 -- T.M.C.L., Washington 
DEAR HELOISE: I like my family to have a hot, nutritious breakfast every 
morning, but with all of us on different schedules, and mornings very hectic in 
our house, it wasn't always practical or even possible. Now I have a microwave 
oven and it's easy. 
On weekends I take time to cook extra amounts of pancakes, waffles, French 
toast, muffins, bacon and sausage. I freeze individual servings of each, then 
on busy mornings the kids and my husband can just "zap" their favorite 
breakfast and have a good, hot meal to start the day. 
 -- JAN, Greensburg, Pa. 
DEAR HELOISE: I'm accumulating more and more special cooking utensils -- 
slotted spoons and skimmers, wire whisks, strainers and more -- that are too 
large or bulky for my kitchen drawers. I put up a pegboard painted to match my 
kitchen decor and hung it on the wall. Now there's no storage problem, the pegs 
can be moved to make more room as I need it, and it gives my kitchen a really 
high-class look. 
 -- CAROL, Sacramento 
DEAR HELOISE: My sister has a simple but wonderful idea. She keeps her large 
kitchen sponge in the top shelf of her dishwasher. It's out of the way, easily 
reached and gets cleaned every time the dishes are washed. It always smells 
clean. 
 -- BEBE, Metairie, La. 
