KEEPING HEALTHY: BREATHING EASY ESSENTIAL IN CAMPERS AND TENTS 
Some healthful hints: 
 -- Adequate ventilation is a matter of life and death when you cook or use a 
heating device in campers, trailers and tents. Fire and heating devices produce 
carbon monoxide, a deadly gas, says the Wilderness Medical Society. Be 
especially careful at higher altitudes. Less oxygen in the air makes smaller 
amounts of carbon monoxide dangerous. 
 -- Most medications labeled "Keep Refrigerated" can safely be stored out of 
the refrigerator for several hours, some for several days. Check with your 
pharmacist. 
However, never keep medications in the glove compartment or trunk of parked 
cars. Very high temperatures will rapidly reduce the potency even of substances 
that do not require refrigeration. 
 -- Drink plenty of fluids your first few days in the tropics to minimize 
fatigue, a common complaint of new arrivals. The fatigue is due to dehydration, 
the result of long plane rides with little humidity in the cabin air and 
excessive perspiration until your body adjusts to the heat. 
The best fluids to drink are fruit juices, bottled water and soft drinks. 
Minimize your intake of alcoholic beverages which can cause further 
dehydration. A diet high in carbohydrates and low in protein might help, too. 
 -- To take a load off your back when you travel, buy luggage with rollers or 
get a collapsible luggage cart. 
Check the luggage and cart to see that the wheels work easily, that they go up 
and down small steps without difficulty and that the strap or handle is 
sufficiently long so that you don't have to hunch over to pull it. 
 -- Don't let huffing and puffing at high altitudes cause you to forget skin 
care. Skin burns rapidly at high altitudes. And if snow is present, be 
especially careful. Snow reflects ultraviolet rays in much the same way as a 
convex mirror. 
Cover up as much as possible. Wear hats, gloves, face masks and nose shields. 
Smear opaque and zinc oxide creams on exposed skin. Pay special attention to 
the nostrils, and front and back of the earlobes. Use an appropriate lip block. 
Hands suffer at high altitude even when covered. Cold and low humidity causes 
cracks and fissures in the fingers. Use moisturizers. 
 -- In China, only Western hotels and a few of the better restaurants use 
disposable chopsticks. Most use reusable chopsticks that nearly always are made 
from wood and generally are washed by hand, perhaps in water that is not hot 
enough to sterilize. Outside of Western hotels, automatic dishwashers are 
practically unknown. 
Some longtime Western residents in China take their own chopsticks to 
restaurants or, when no one is looking, pour hot tea over the restaurant's 
chopsticks before using. 
Be especially cautious of chopsticks on riverboats since river water may be 
used for dishwashing. 
 -- Travelers who like eggs may have a cause for concern in addition to high 
cholesterol levels. 
Everywhere, but especially in parts of the world where sanitation is less than 
optimal, raw and inadequately cooked eggs may be a source of bacteria that can 
cause intestinal upsets. 
Insist that your eggs are properly cooked -- if scrambled, until no longer 
soft; if fried, poached or soft boiled, until the yolk is set and the white 
congealed. The Centers for Disease Control advises that eggs should be boiled 
for seven minutes, poached for five or fried for three minutes on each side. 
Also, in areas of poor sanitation, stay away from foods made with raw eggs: for 
example, homemade mayonnaise, hollandaise sauce, egg nog and ice cream. 
On camping trips, never cool freshly boiled eggs in stream water. Stream water 
can contain germs that cause intestinal illness. The water -- and the germs -- 
may get through cracks in the shell. 
