ALLEGED DRUG KINGPIN SEIZED IN SAN MARINO 
Federal drug agents on Thursday quietly arrested a San Marino resident 
described as one of the world's largest cocaine traffickers and successor to 
the "king" of the Bolivian cocaine trade. 
The arrest of Jorge Roca-Suarez, 38, at his 19-room house was confirmed by 
Julius C. Beretta, special agent in charge of the San Diego office of the U.S. 
Drug Enforcement Administration. Agents also arrested Roca's wife, Beatriz 
Roca-Torres, 40, in nearby Monterey Park, Beretta said. 
Both were being held on charges of conspiracy to possess cocaine with the 
intent to deliver, the agent said. 
Beretta would divulge no more about the arrests or the charges against the 
couple, saying only that Roca is a resident immigrant in this country and "one 
of the most significant cocaine traffickers in the United States, on par with a 
Medellin or Cali cartel leaders." 
One law enforcement source said the arrests stem from a federal indictment that 
is expected to be unsealed today. The source said the investigation rivals that 
of former Panama strongman Manuel Noriega, who is jailed in Miami while 
awaiting trial on drug charges. 
Agents arrested Roca at his 5,000-square-foot brick home on a hillside in one 
of San Marino's most exclusive enclaves. By late afternoon, agents were still 
searching the house on Old Mill Road. 
Several children as well as a maid were being detained inside the house, agents 
said. 
DEA agents also served as many as 20 search warrants in San Marino, Alhambra, 
Pasadena and San Dimas, the source said. Roca's bank accounts were seized, and 
his properties searched. A house searched in San Dimas has 10,000 square feet 
of living space and was purchased by Roca for $2 million in cash, the source 
said. 
Roca is from the northeastern Beni region of Bolivia and is known as "Techo de 
Paja (Straw Roof)" because of his blond hair. His arrest, sources said, is seen 
as a coup for the DEA because the agency will not need to go through the 
process of trying to extradite him from a foreign country. 
Roca is the nephew of Roberto Suarez Gomez, a DEA fugitive who is currently 
serving a 15-year sentence in Bolivia on drug charges. Suarez, the patriarch of 
a respected cattle-ranching family, became known in the 1970s and early 1980s 
as the ruler of Bolivia's biggest cocaine-trafficking empires and the "king of 
cocaine" in that South American country. Bolivian officials have refused U.S. 
requests for his extradition. 
Roca reportedly grew up with his mother in Los Angeles and returned to Bolivia 
when he was about 20. He allegedly was one of his uncle's trusted lieutenants. 
He allegedly betrayed Suarez and now, according to law enforcement officials, 
rules the Bolivian cocaine trade along with a group of younger cocaine 
traffickers who provide tons of the drug for the U.S. and European drug 
markets. 
County property records indicate that "George and Cirila Roca" bought the San 
Marino home for $1.4 million in July, 1988. 
Don Banderas, principal of San Marino High School, said Jorge Roca-Suarez told 
him he was in the real estate business. Roca's 17-year-old son enrolled in the 
school in September along with three other relatives, either siblings or 
cousins, the principal said. 
Although the average family income in San Marino is about $127,000, some of the 
Rocas' neighbors in the San Gabriel Valley city were struck by their apparent 
wealth. 
"One of my neighbors did say he (had) too many fancy cars and stuff," said one 
woman who spoke on condition of anonymity. 
Another neighbor said that the family lived quietly and put a lot of work into 
the house. 
"It's getting scary," said one woman who noted that the house is located half a 
block from the scene of a Feb. 5, 1988, shoot-out between DEA agents and a 
carload of Taiwanese drug suspects that left two agents and two suspects dead. 
"I think I'll move," she added, with a laugh. 
Bolivia is a significant cog in the international cocaine trade and provides a 
large proportion of the coca leaves and cocaine paste that are eventually 
refined into powdered and rock cocaine. 
Illegal drug trafficking in the country began in earnest in the 1970s under the 
tutelage of the Colombian traffickers. In his heyday, Roca's uncle, Suarez, 
lived and operated virtually with impunity. He once even offered to pay the 
Bolivian foreign debt -- an offer that the government rejected. 
The Bolivian press once quoted him as bragging that he had $400 million and 40 
airplanes. 
He was arrested in 1988, however, and sent to a La Paz penitentiary. Soon 
after, then-U.S. Secretary of State George Schultz applauded the arrest as a 
"triumph of law enforcement" in the South American country. 
But DEA officials said Roca -- once a trusted lieutenant in the ring -- had 
already taken over the drug operation by dealing on his own with the Colombian 
drug cartels, supplying them with semi-refined cocaine paste at prices lower 
than those charged by his uncle. 
In August, 1988, a DEA spokesman said Roca "knows we are investigating him, and 
he may be afraid of going back (to the United States) now." It was unknown when 
Roca returned. 
Times staff writers Paul Lieberman and Tracy Wilkinson contributed to this 
report. 
