PLANNERS HEED PICUS, REJECT WARNER RIDGE 
A City Council committee voted Tuesday to recommend that a controversial Warner 
Ridge office project be rejected and the land rezoned for houses. 
The council's Planning and Land Use Management Committee voted 2 to 1 against 
the $150-million project in light of a recommendation against it by City 
Councilwoman Joy Picus, and a public hearing Tuesday at which some Woodland 
Hills residents sharply criticized it. 
The issue next goes to the full council, which is expected to consider it next 
month. 
Normally the council heeds the wishes of the council member in whose district a 
development is proposed. 
Picus, whose district includes Warner Ridge at the northeast corner of De Soto 
Avenue and Oxnard Street, said developer Jack Spound's project was 
ill-conceived and would be out of scale with the neighborhood. 
She argued that De Soto should be maintained as the boundary between Warner 
Center's commercial development on the west side and residences to the east. 
In voting to reject the project, Councilmen Michael Woo and Hal Bernson said 
they were influenced by Picus' position, especially regarding allowing 
commercial development east of De Soto. 
Councilman Robert Farrell, the lone dissenter, said he was persuaded to vote 
for Spound's project by the fact that it had been approved by both a city 
hearing examiner and the city Planning Commission. 
Commissioners had praised the nine-building, 810,000-square-foot project as a 
"quality development" that would have generous amounts of open space and 
measures to reduce traffic congestion. 
An angry Spound said that the council, if it rejects the development, will be 
sending the "dangerous message" that a project can be turned down "on the whim 
of a single council member whose motives are purely political." 
During the hearing, five residents of a condominium complex east of De Soto 
supported the office project. 
They endorsed Spound's proposal because it would create a landscaping buffer 
near their condominiums. They said they preferred the offices to the 100 or 
more houses that would be allowed under Picus' rezoning proposal. 
But more than a dozen opponents, including leaders of the Woodland Hills 
Homeowners Organization, said the project would intensify what one member 
called a "quagmire of traffic" in and around Warner Center. 
Gordon Murley, representing the Federation of Hillside and Canyon Assns., 
sarcastically suggested that Spound be required to "double- or triple-deck" 
nearby streets to offset the traffic his development would generate. 
