MYERSON &amp; KUHN LAW FIRM FILES FOR CHAPTER 11; 
ATTORNEYS: THE FIRM HAS NOT MATCHED THE AMBITIONS OF ITS FOUNDERS, LITIGATOR 
HARVEY MYERSON AND BOWIE KUHN, FORMER BASEBALL COMMISSIONER. 
Myerson &amp; Kuhn, an elite law firm built last year when one of the nation's 
largest firms went bankrupt, has itself filed for reorganization under Chapter 
11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. 
Founded by flamboyant litigator Harvey Myerson and former baseball commissioner 
Bowie Kuhn, the firm one year ago boasted a staff of 160 lawyers, including 
big-name talent that it attracted with hefty salaries. But the firm's receipts 
never matched its ambitions, and Myerson &amp; Kuhn has been cited as an 
example of how today's big firms can elude management control. 
The firm sought bankruptcy court protection in a petition filed Wednesday in 
U.S. Bankruptcy Court in New York. 
Among the firm's creditors was Marine Midland Bank, which was listed on the 
petition as being owed $3 million. 
The firm and some of its remaining partners still face a sizable claim from a 
former client, the Shearson Lehman Hutton investment firm. In one of the 
heaviest blows to the firm, Shearson last year fired Myerson &amp; Kuhn and 
then sued it for allegedly overbilling the brokerage by at least $2 million. 
Shearson settled for $1.2 million last June. But this week the investment firm 
filed a new suit, claiming that the law firm still owed $488,000 of the 
settlement. 
Myerson &amp; Kuhn was organized by trial lawyer Myerson two months after the 
November, 1987, collapse of Finley, Kumble, Wagner, Heine, Unterberg, Manley, 
Myerson &amp; Casey, a law firm that was then the nation's fourth largest. 
Myerson launched the firm with a fanfare of publicity and a pledge that it 
would have first-year revenue of $50 million to $75 million. He described the 
organization as a "start-up superstar firm" with a client list that included 
Shearson, the Trump Organization and Weyerhaeuser Co. 
But the firm never reached that revenue goal and had a falling out with Donald 
Trump, in addition to Shearson. 
Among Myerson &amp; Kuhn's original hires were such widely recognized names as 
Faith Ryan Whittlesey, a former U.S. ambassador to Switzerland, and Gerald 
Eppner, a top corporate lawyer. 
During much of this year, Myerson &amp; Kuhn saw a stream of defections from 
its offices in New York, Los Angeles, Washington and Philadelphia. 
In Los Angeles, the firm's office fell from a peak of 19 lawyers to 12. 
Earlier this month, the Los Angeles lawyers broke away from the home office and 
set up shop under a new name, Cooper &amp; Dempsey, according to partner 
Michael D. Dempsey. 
Still unclear at this point is exactly what will happen to the leases on the 
Los Angeles group's office space and equipment, which are held under the 
Myerson &amp; Kuhn name and are thus included in the bankruptcy proceeding. 
"For the moment, we're stuck in this," Dempsey said. 
Myerson is now forming a firm of his own in New York, while Kuhn, 62, is 
reportedly considering retiring. 
