FOOTBALL AWARDS; 
VENICE CO-COACHES AL DELLINGER, TONY CHRETIN HONORED, LONG WITH LOUIS JONES AND 
SANTA MONICA'S ERIC BANDUCCI; 
PREPS: THE GLEN DAVIS AWARD, FOR THE TOP HIGH SCHOOL PLAYER IN SOUTHERN 
CALIFORNIA, WAS GIVEN TO THE LATE KEVIN COPELAND OF DORSEY. 
Venice Co-Coaches Al Dellinger and Tony Chretin and their quarterback, Louis 
Jones, and Santa Monica center Eric Banducci won the top Westside honors at the 
annual Times high school football awards brunch. 
Dellinger and Chretin were named the area's coaches of the year, Jones back of 
the year and Banducci lineman of the year. 
The late Kevin Copeland of Dorsey High was honored in memory with the third 
annual Glenn Davis Award, given to the top high school football player in 
Southern California. 
Copeland, a wide receiver who was considered one of the top players in the 
state, collapsed and later died from heart failure during a game against San 
Pedro this season. He was 17. 
Dorsey, which had dedicated its season to Copeland, won its first Los Angeles 
City 4-A Division championship last week, defeating Carson, 26-15. 
The invitational event, sponsored by the Los Angeles Times Fund, brought 
together parents, head coaches and 276 players from all-star first teams in 12 
Times circulation areas: Westside, Central, Inland Empire (Riverside and San 
Bernardino counties), Orange County, San Gabriel Valley, Southeast, South 
Coast, Glendale, South Bay, San Fernando Valley, San Diego County and Ventura 
County. 
Each player received a plaque and certificate. In addition, the backs and 
linemen of the year received trophies. 
This is the second time that Dellinger, 49, has been named a Times coach of the 
year. In 1977 he was honored as head coach of a Venice team that was undefeated 
in the regular season, won the Western League championship and finished the 
year with a 9-1-1 record. 
The 1977 Gondoliers had several star players, including some who went on to 
college football and some who also played professionally. They included 
defensive back Dana McLemore (University of Hawaii, San Francisco 49ers), 
running back Keyvan Jenkins (Nevada Las Vegas, Canadian Football League), 
running back-defensive back Kinyon Jenkins, Keyvan's brother, (Nevada Las 
Vegas, San Diego State), quarterback Antonio Gasca (Santa Monica College, Cal 
State Long Beach) and offensive linemen Darryl Moore (USC) and Jeff Pew 
(Oregon). 
The 1989 Venice team may not have had as many stars, but it had an 11-1 record. 
This year's players, Dellinger said, "got maximum mileage out of their ability. 
We also had a very, very good offensive line, a better offensive line" than 
that of the 1977 team. 
A graduate of UCLA, Dellinger was an offensive lineman at University High 
School and Santa Monica College. He began coaching as a volunteer assistant at 
Palisades High School in 1966, was head coach at Fairfax High from 1967 to 
1971, became an assistant at Venice in 1971 and went on to serve at Venice as a 
co-coach, head coach and co-coach again this year with Chretin. 
Chretin, 37, played and coached on undefeated Venice B teams, became a varsity 
assistant in 1984 and moved to co-coach in charge of the defense this season as 
Dellinger handled the duties of offensive coordinator. Chretin is a graduate of 
Cal State Long Beach. 
Dellinger said that Jones, a 6-foot-2, 200-pound senior, was the "best 
all-around player" he has seen in 25 years of coaching and was the catalyst for 
Venice's strong season. 
A converted wide receiver, Jones moved to quarterback this year and continued 
to be a fine defensive back. He didn't pass often (37 completions in 87 
attempts for 416 yards and five touchdowns). But he ran often and well (96 
carries, 769 yards and 14 touchdowns), and he always ran the show. 
Jones was the Gondoliers' leading tackler in the secondary, had eight sacks and 
five interceptions and forced four fumbles. He also handled the punting and 
kicking. 
Banducci, who was a defensive lineman as well as a center, is a grandson of the 
late Bruno Banducci, who was a top lineman with the San Francisco 49ers. 
Tebb Kusserow, Santa Monica High coach, said Banducci is an "excellent blocker 
with great quickness and strength." The 6-3, 240-pound senior was the leading 
tackler on the Vikings' line. 
Besides Jones and Banducci, The Times' All-Westside first team on offense 
includes wide receivers Anthony Cope of Palisades and John Aylsworth of Santa 
Monica and linemen Darren Johnson of Westchester, Julio Diaz of Venice, Noah R. 
Kaiser of Westchester and Brian Gorski of Venice. 
The first-team running backs are Damone Ewell of St. Monica, John Haqq of 
Culver City and Tim Holliday of Westchester. 
On defense, the first team includes linemen Todd Kusserow of Santa Monica, 
Bryan McElroy of Palisades, Floyd Hines of St. Bernard and Devon Sando of 
Beverly Hills and linebackers Henry (Butch) Hahn of Westchester, Michael 
Curutchet of St. Monica and Art Cabral of Venice. 
In the first-team defensive backfield are Albert (Lefty) Jones of St. Monica, 
Greg Hooks of Culver City, Lamar K. Lyons II of St. Monica and Terence Sullivan 
of St. Bernard. 
The second team on offense has wide receivers John Song of Beverly Hills and 
Kyle Bryant of University and linemen Bryan Orange of Hamilton, Payam Saadat of 
St. Monica, Charles Geitzen of Hamilton, Nigel Mills of Venice and Hassan Allen 
of Westchester. 
Bob Aylsworth of Santa Monica (John's brother) is the second-team quarterback, 
and the running backs are Mario Mattison of Fairfax, Walter Grissam of 
Westchester and Robert Hughes of University. The kicker is Culver City punter 
Rick Heineman. 
On defense, the second-team linemen are Humberto Irigoyen of Daniel Murphy, 
Antonio Johnson of Culver City, Wes Smith of Westchester and Fabrice Perzik of 
Beverly Hills. The linebackers are Matt Schmitter of Santa Monica, Alex Kahan 
of Beverly Hills and Dominic Walker of Palisades. 
Defensive backs are Troy Dunlap of Culver City, Lerone McElrath of Venice, 
Keith Walk Green of St. Monica and Tharen Todd of Fairfax. 
