CZECHOSLOVAKS RENEW CALL FOR GOVERNMENT TO RESIGN 
Czechoslovaks renewed their massive street protests Monday as more than 150,000 
people jammed into the capital's main square to demand the resignation of a 
Communist-dominated government appointed only the day before. 
The protest set up a new confrontation between the country's recently formed 
opposition movement pressing for free elections and Czechoslovakia's 
beleaguered Communist Party, which is fighting an increasingly desperate battle 
to survive. 
After briefly stunning the opposition by taking 16 of 21 seats in the new 
Cabinet named Sunday, the Communists by late Monday showed signs of being once 
again on the retreat. 
Opposition Civic Forum speakers set a Sunday deadline for a new, more balanced 
government and threatened a general strike the following day to underscore 
their resolve. 
"We demand a complete change of government by next Sunday that will reflect the 
new mood of the people," declared Jiri Cerny, a Civic Forum member. 
The new government is transitional, with its principal mandate to prepare 
Czechoslvakia for its first free elections in over 40 years, possibly by next 
July. 
There were also large anti-government demonstrations in Bratislava, Ostrava and 
other cities. 
In another significant move Monday, Civic Forum said it will for the first time 
nominate individuals for interim government posts. 
"Civic Forum will support certain persons toward this new government," 
spokesman Vaclav Maly said. 
The group's resistance to put forward specific names despite requests by 
Communist Prime Minister Ladislav Adamec may have been one reason for the 
preponderance of Communists in the government that was announced, analysts 
believe. 
Civic Forum also said it plans to endorse a slate of candidates for the 
national elections next year but will still not declare itself a political 
party. 
The tactic is similar to that successfully employed by the Polish opposition 
group Solidarity, whose endorsement guided voters to otherwise unknown 
candidates. 
The size of the crowd in Prague and the power of its response to speaker after 
speaker seemed to visibly revive spirits among exhausted opposition leaders, 
who had appeared shocked and in disarray after the unveiling Sunday of a new 
Communist-dominated government. 
Opposition leaders had called for an interim government "of professionals and 
technocrats" to lead the country toward full democracy. 
The crowd was filled with faces young and old, and entire families huddled 
together trying to keep warm in the freezing fog. 
Euphoria Missing 
Monday's mass protest carried little of the elation and euphoria that came with 
the first doses of freedom two weeks ago. 
Instead, the gathering had a distinctly harder, impatient edge as speakers 
demanded an end to Communist-dominated government. 
The demands, which also including the resignation of President Gustav Husak, 
were met by roars of approval that echoed through the frigid late autumn 
afternoon. 
Husak was installed as Communist Party leader after the 1968 Soviet-led 
invasion that toppled party leader Alexander Dubcek and ended his Prague Spring 
reforms. 
While the initial demonstrations last month that toppled party leader Milos 
Jakes' regime focused heavily on personalities within the ruling Politburo, the 
issue had broadened Monday. 
Demonstrators seemed to be rejecting communism as such. 
"We are fed up, we are fed up!" the crowd shouted at one point, while on 
another occasion, the chant, "We hate them, we hate them" rose from the 
protest. 
One sign read: "Five Crumbs Won't Feed Us" -- a reference to the five 
non-Communist posts in the new Cabinet. 
For the first time, there were also calls to punish those members of the 
hierarchy who had already resigned. 
Civic Forum protest organizers have consistently stressed the moral element of 
their movement and fretted about possible violence. 
"People can only be insulted so often," said Michal Horaceck, a Civic Forum 
negotiator, expressing concern that the refusal of the Communists to yield 
power was adding to tensions in the street. 
Protest organizers Monday did not immediately call for another demonstration 
for today, instead telling early risers to listen on the radio for 
instructions. 
In an agreement worked out in recent days with the government, Civic Forum was 
awarded 1 1/2 hours of radio time, including the 6:30-7 a.m. slot, a time of 
peak listening in Prague. 
In a speech to protesters, a representative of the Workers Strike Committee, 
Igor Pleskot, called for elections of the Communist-dominated trade union 
committees by Dec. 20 and an end to party committees at workplaces. 
Others called for the abolition of the party's praetorian guard, a body known 
as the People's Militia. 
While Monday's demonstration was smaller than some previous protests, it was 
seen as enough to regenerate strong political pressure on the Communist Party 
hierarchy to cede more power. 
Some analysts questioned whether citizens would respond to a new call for 
demonstrations a week after they had been suspended. 
There seemed little hesitation among those in the capital. 
"I've had it up to here with them," commented a middle-aged store clerk as she 
put her hand level with her nose. "I will protest for weeks if I have to." 
Responding to the powerful public reaction, Communist Deputy Prime Minister 
Bohumil Urban met with a Civic Forum delegation Monday in talks that reportedly 
centered on how to build a new government. 
A Civic Forum strategist described the talks as paving the way for substantive 
negotiations the group hopes to conduct with Adamec when he returns later this 
week from Moscow. 
In another development, the Czech regional government responsible for the 
administration of Bohemia and Moravia suspended the announcement of its new 
Cabinet lineup, apparently in light of Monday's demonstrations. 
Tough Talks 
Civic Forum spokesman Josef Lavrosek said late Monday that "tough" negotiations 
were under way with Frantisek Pitra, premier of the Czech republic government, 
for a new lineup that might contain a minority of Communists. The governments 
of the Czech and Slovak republics control key areas such as justice and 
education in their respective regions. 
The Czechoslovak Communists were also buffeted by the mass resignations of 
their East German colleagues and the Warsaw Pact statement in Moscow that 
condemned the 1968 invasion. 
Opposition figures predicted the additional weight of such a joint 
international declaration would further damage those members of the country's 
Communist leadership linked with the invasion. 
"It's inevitable that the president and a few dozen very high officials and 
members of Parliament will have to resign," said Civic Forum's Jan Urban. "It 
will mean that in a very short time, they will have to rehabilitate one-half 
million people." 
In the years after the invasion, Jakes led a purge of Dubcek and the liberal 
wing of the party that supported him that resulted in the expulsion of nearly 
half a million party members. 
