L.A. ROMANIANS VOICE SUPPORT AT VIGIL 
About 300 Romanian protesters held a candlelight vigil Sunday night outside Los 
Angeles City Hall, calling for military and economic support to revolutionary 
troops fighting the security forces of ousted dictator Nicolae Ceausescu. 
"We need support now, not a week later," said Ionela Opran, a spokeswoman for 
the Romanian Faith and Freedom Coalition, which organized the protest. 
Opran said the coalition was also calling for the Romanian Embassy in 
Washington to make public the files kept by Ceausescu's security agents on 
Romanian dissidents in the United States. About 40,000 Romanians live in 
Southern California. 
The demonstrators sang "Rise up Romanian," a popular protest song, and the 
Romanian national anthem. Others raised clenched fists and chanted slogans in 
support of the Romanian army, which has played an important role in the 
overthrow of Ceausescu and continues to battle members of a secret police force 
loyal to the dictator. 
Nicolae Suciu, 22, was one of several Romanian exiles at the demonstration who 
said they were prepared to travel to their homeland to fight as volunteers for 
the provisional revolutionary government. 
"I'm a married man with two children," he said. "But I'm ready to go fight with 
my friends, my brothers, my cousins, who are standing up to the killers in 
Ceausescu's secret police." 
Suciu called on the United States to provide military support to the 
revolutionaries in Romania. 
"We need someone to give us armaments, munitions, guns. We need M-1 rifles, 
bazookas, everything," said Suciu, who wore a sash made of red, blue and yellow 
ribbons, the colors of the Romanian flag. 
Suciu said he had spoken by telephone with eyewitnesses to the fighting in the 
provincial cities of Medias and Sibiu. But most of the protesters said they 
have had little or no contact with their relatives in Romania since the 
fighting began last week in the provincial town of Timisoara. 
Bruno Nastasescu, 55, said the only information he had about the events in his 
native country was from television news reports, which showed scenes of 
fighting in Bucharest and the unearthing of mass graves in Timisoara. 
"I am watching the television and I am crying all the time," he said. 
