VENTURA COUNTY NEWS ROUNDUP: COUNTYWIDE; 
BOAT PARADE, TREE-LIGHTING EVENTS PLANNED 
Final touches are being put on plans for Christmas celebrations throughout 
Ventura County, ranging from tree-lighting ceremonies to a parade of lights at 
Channel Islands Harbor. 
The city of Moorpark and the Moorpark Arts Committee have planned a 
tree-lighting ceremony for 7 p.m. today at the Community Center. After the tree 
is lit by Mayor Paul W. Lawrason Jr., the Westlake Village Voices and the Flory 
Avenue Chorale will entertain. Santa Claus is scheduled to arrive at 8 p.m. 
A newly formed volunteer Oxnard business group, the Downtowners, and the city's 
Redevelopment Agency will sponsor a tree-lighting ceremony. The ceremony, which 
has been held for 40 years under other sponsors, will be at Plaza Park at 4:30 
p.m. Friday, with Mayor Nao Takasugi lighting the tree. Also planned are 
caroling, Santa's Village and a toy drive for needy children. 
Camarillo Hospice is launching its fifth annual community event, "Light Up a 
Life," in which the public is invited to remember a loved one who has died by 
making a donation to the organization, which cares for terminally ill patients. 
Those donations will place colored lights on the Tree of Life at Constitution 
Park near Camarillo City Hall. The lighting ceremony will be held during the 
Holiday Festival Program at 6 p.m. Friday. 
At 1 p.m. Saturday, the Oxnard Harbor Board of Realtors is sponsoring a 
Christmas Can tree-lighting ceremony at the Esplanade Shopping Center with 
Takasugi set to light the tree. The organization has already raised $6,000, 
equal to 12,000 cans of food, sponsors said. The Salvation Army is expected to 
be the major benefactor. Donations will also go to the Ventura County Rescue 
Mission in Oxnard and Food Share, which works with about 160 charities in the 
county. 
The Livingston Memorial Visiting Nurse Assn. is sponsoring a tree-lighting 
ceremony at 6 p.m. Saturday at Buenaventura Plaza. Gospel singer Marlene Elias 
will entertain. The association provides in-home support services to terminally 
ill patients and their families. 
At 7 p.m. Saturday, the 25th anniversary Parade of Lights will begin at Channel 
Islands Harbor. Forty decorated boats, many of which will have music and 
animated figures, will be included. Santa Claus will be grand marshal. GERRY 
BRAILO SPENCER 
