WHAT THEY AREN'T READING ON THE OTHER SIDE 
In the cramped stockroom of a tiny bookstore two blocks off Unter den Linden, 
East Berlin's wide and elegant east-west avenue, the young bookseller shrugged 
her shoulders. 
"Earlier, East Germany was a 'Land of Readers,' a country proud of its poets 
and playwrights," she said. "Everyone read, whenever there was time, anywhere. 
"Today, it's not the same. People have other things to do." 
This was not an answer anyone might have expected. Before the wall dividing the 
two Germanys collapsed in late 1989, East German readers had to content 
themselves with those books both allowed by government censor and physically 
available -- Russian history and literature, German classics, carefully 
constructed studies of European history and the occasional translation of a 
Bellow or a P. D. James. All else -- from Nietzsche to Stephen King -- was 
simply not to be had. 
Now that the German Democratic Republic has ceased to exist and readers can 
select their own books for the first time in decades, one might be tempted to 
conclude that bookstores could not stock their shelves fast enough to meet the 
surging demand. The old East German hardbacks, with pages the color and 
consistency of a paper towel, would now serve as doorstops or, when stacked, as 
inexpensive and durable supports for outdoor remainder displays. The handsome 
Western editions, representing an entire world of fresh ideas, would meanwhile 
be finding their way into the most remote Saxon farmhouse. In other words, a 
reader's and a bookseller's dream. And yet -- as one can infer from 22-year-old 
bookseller Martina Nagora's lament -- it's closer to a nightmare. 
Across the former Communist state, book sales have dropped considerably since 
the government's demise. According to Bernhard Wosnitzka, manager of East 
Berlin's Das Internationale Buch, the largest bookstore in East Germany, his 
sales have fallen 20% in the last year. Buchhandlung am Bahnhof 
Friedrichstrasse, the much smaller store managed by Nagora, has experienced a 
50% reduction in sales. 
It's certainly not want of books or service that's causing the drought. Das 
Internationale Buch, for instance, boasts an impressive selection of titles, 
from highly technical computer literature to the most sophisticated 
contemporary fiction. Only the better American bookstores offer as varied a 
menu. Eager to assist and advise, clerks stand almost at attention at 15-foot 
intervals -- perhaps a faint taste of old Prussia. The furnishings are plain 
with bare floors below and exposed wires overhead, but still attractive by East 
German standards. 
When customers do decide to buy books, they are taking home travel books, 
cookbooks, how-to books, children's books and foreign-language dictionaries and 
cassettes. Books representing 40 years' worth of previously unavailable 
history, science, literature and theology are, for the most part, collecting 
dust. In a land that can claim one of the world's most brilliant intellectual 
traditions, Walt Disney is preferred to Walter Benjamin, hot-pasta recipes to 
Cold War studies. 
In Nagora's shop, the top three categories of books sold are how-to books, such 
as the hugely popular "1,000 Completely Legal Ways to Reduce Your Taxes"; 
foreign-language dictionaries, especially German-English, and paperbacks of 
popular fiction by authors such as King, Danielle Steel, James Clavell and 
Ephraim Kishon, a Hungarian-born satirist somewhere between Woody Allen and 
Lewis Grizzard. Also in demand are travel books to all points beyond the German 
border, and colorful hardcover children's books: "Snow White," "Alice in 
Wonderland" and a whole series on "Alf." 
Among the more serious American authors now read are Salinger, Updike, Irving, 
Kerouac and Bukowski. Irving's "Garp" ranks third on the best-seller list at 
Das Internationale Buch. Asked why these specific authors -- whose best-known 
work dates from several years back -- are now of interest, Nagora said: "In the 
West, they are always waiting for new writers, the latest from Latin America, 
for example. Over here, they first have to read what they could not get 
earlier." 
One needn't probe too deeply to uncover possible explanations for the buying 
trends and slow sales. In the first place, East Germans don't have much money. 
The unemployment rate is soaring, and the salaries of those who do have jobs 
have not kept pace with sudden increases in the price of consumer goods, such 
as books. As recently as 14 months ago, a paperback could be had for the 
equivalent of $1; today, most cost about $6. Hardbacks sold for $8 then; now 
they start at $25. 
A second reason is that many of those people who earlier bought books are now 
vacationing in Venice, watching the 20 new channels on their new TVs and 
spending their money on videocassettes, bananas and pornography. A recent 
article in Die Zeit, a weekly West German newspaper, described the enormous 
success of Leipzig's first porn shop on its opening day of business. The shop 
took in enough money after 97 seconds of operation to pay its rent for the next 
month; by the end of the day, it had done about $13,000 worth of business. 
A third, perhaps related reason for waning book interest is the possibility 
that East Germans no longer need the written word to escape from the drudgery 
of life in a Communist state. Earlier, they swarmed to bookstores, libraries, 
cinemas and museums to rescue themselves from the cultural and spiritual vacuum 
that was the former East Germany. Today, there are other outlets for their 
frustrations and other merchandise for their marks. 
Finally, in a country just awakening from a 40-year slumber, there must be 
little time for reading anything other than the most practical books. Feeding 
the family or heating a drafty apartment are more pressing matters these days. 
As uninviting as the bookselling climate may seem for the two East Berlin 
stores, they are actually the fortunate ones. Owned by a West German chain 
based in Bonn, they have enjoyed all the advantages of Western book-business 
know-how as well as financial backing to weather slower buying periods. A few 
subway stops in any direction from the city center lie bookstores whose homely 
interiors and meager offerings more accurately mirror the depressed economy. 
Wosnitzka and Nagora believe many of the country's 80-odd bookstores are on the 
verge of extinction. That is sad news indeed, especially for the cultural 
health of a country seeking to articulate a new identity. Books enrich as well 
as inform and entertain; unfortunately, they also cost money. 
