THE SILICONE CONTROVERSY; 
HEALTH: ACTIVISTS TAKE OFFENSIVE AGAINST BREAST IMPLANTS, ALLEGING HEALTH 
RISKS; MANY DOCTORS, MANUFACTURERS SAY THEY'RE ALARMISTS. 
For years, Marie Walsh, a Laguna Hills mother of eight, watched her health 
deteriorate. She was plagued with fatigue, abdominal pains, irregular menstrual 
periods and night sweats. 
Then one morning in February of 1984, she awoke and found the front of her 
nightgown damp with a bloody gel. A surgeon found that an implant in her left 
breast had ruptured, spilling silicone gel over the breast cavity. He cleaned 
out as much of the gel as he could and put in a new implant. 
But Walsh's problems worsened. 
She needed multiple surgeries to replace later implants that hardened 
uncomfortably and to remove silicone-filled tumors. She starting developing a 
variety of debilitating diseases: rheumatoid arthritis that made it painful for 
her to walk; scleroderma that tightened her skin and made her hollow-eyed, and 
chronic lymph, kidney and liver problems. 
"I'm disintegrating," she said. "It's just a question of time (as to) what is 
going to go next." 
Walsh and her doctor are convinced that silicone gel from the implants has 
migrated through her body and caused chaos in her immune system. 
Earlier this year, Walsh won an $80,000 settlement against the manufacturer of 
the ruptured breast implant and that publicity has spun her into the center of 
an emerging nationwide network of women who allege that implants pose health 
hazards that are being kept a secret from consumers. 
She and other activists are crashing seminars on breast augmentation, courting 
newspaper and television reporters and filing lawsuits to draw attention to 
their plight. 
Their fears are considered irrational by manufacturers of breast implants and 
most plastic surgeons, who contend that the devices' benefits -- primarily that 
of boosting a woman's self-esteem -- outweigh the risks. They say there is no 
scientific evidence to prove any link between breast implants and cancer or 
diseases that attack the immune system. 
Dr. Garry Brody, a clinical professor of plastic surgery at the University of 
Southern California and chairman of the society's plastic surgery device 
council, complained that the women in the Command Trust Network are 
discouraging women who would benefit from breast implants by "spreading panic." 
Brody said a USC study is following more than 3,000 women in Los Angeles County 
who have had silicone breast implants and discovered so far that they have no 
higher incidence of cancer than the general public. 
But breast implants are becoming increasingly controversial. 
Safety concerns have prompted the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and its 
Canadian counterpart to call for further investigations and to collect test 
data from manufacturers. 
Critics of breast implants have in their corner a Ralph Nader-founded advocate 
organization, Public Citizen Health Research Group, which has demanded that 
implants be taken off the market and has sued the FDA for access to 
manufacturers' records. 
The stakes are high. An estimated 2 million U.S. women have had breast 
implants, which are being performed at a rate of about 130,000 a year. About 
85% of breast implants are cosmetic. The rest are performed to reconstruct 
breasts after cancer surgery. 
Said Dr. William Shaw, chief of the division of plastic surgery at UCLA Medical 
Center: "It could be a bigger problem waiting to be confirmed or a smaller 
problem with a great deal of hysteria." 
At the center of the controversy are devices that look like sacks made of a 
rubbery silicone skin and filled with silicone gel. 
They were designed by two plastic surgeons from Houston looking for an 
alternative to plastic sponge implants, used since the 1930s, which were 
unacceptable because they made the breast very hard and frequently caused 
allergic reactions. 
Doctors also were injecting silicone liquid directly into women's breasts, in 
some cases causing severe health problems, but the FDA stopped that practice in 
the early 1960s. 
The first silicone-gel devices were implanted in 1963, and they have become 
especially popular in recent years as fashion and films have stressed the 
larger-breasted look. Advertisements in women's magazines and newspapers have 
enticed women with the purported ease of the procedure, which costs $2,000 to 
$5,000. 
Silicone gel is used in the implant to give a natural feeling to the breast; 
the sack is designed to prevent the gel from getting into body tissue. 
However, it quickly became obvious that the device had problems. Patients 
complained about excessive scar tissue building up around the implant, making 
the breast unnaturally hard and causing pain. This condition occurs in 30% to 
50% of breast-implant patients, many of whom have repeated surgeries to try to 
correct it. 
Also, it is generally conceded that implants can hamper efforts to detect 
breast cancer through mammography. 
Of far greater dispute is whether silicone gel, some of which leaks out of all 
implants, can damage a woman's health. While the medical community once 
considered silicone "inert" within the body, more recent research indicates 
that that may not be the case. 
There is additional concern about a type of silicone implant surrounded by a 
covering of polyurethane foam that is intended to reduce the scarring. 
The foam degrades in the body and some studies have shown that under certain 
laboratory conditions, the disintegrating foam emits diamino toluene diamene, a 
known carcinogen in animals. 
The FDA is beginning to look closer at these issues and demand more information 
from manufacturers. 
The agency in 1988 determined that breast implants pose "a potential 
unreasonable risk of injury," but it is still drafting the testing requirements 
that manufacturers will have to meet. For now, implants can be sold without 
passing any safety tests specified by the FDA. 
The FDA acknowledges that even if preliminary tests show breast implants to be 
safe, it may be 10 or 15 years before there is enough data to know for certain 
if implants increase the risk of cancer or immune-system diseases. 
Despite her lingering illnesses, Marie Walsh still carries implants in each of 
her breasts. 
"Every doctor has told me it won't make a difference" in her health at this 
point whether they are removed or not, she said. But recently, she decided to 
take them out after consulting with a new physician. 
"Her problem is induced by the silicone, and if she takes it out, there is at 
least a 50% chance that she will improve," said Dr. Gharoon Panahi, a 
Westminster rheumatologist. 
"I'd give anything to have my life back," she said. "I would rather be 
flat-chested and have my health and vitality." 
Walsh, who has been forced by ill health to quit a career in securities sales 
and go on permanent state disability, is devoting much of her energy to 
organizing a support group in Orange County for women with similar problems. 
She is assisted by Marsha Chambers, a Tustin resident who got in touch with 
Walsh after reading a newspaper story about her legal settlement. Chambers 
suffers from hepatitus and other ailments she blames on the breast implants 
that she had removed in June. 
Together the women placed a tiny ad in a local Tustin newspaper that attracted 
40 more women who now meet regularly to discuss what to do about their health 
and how to warn others who may be thinking about enlarging their breasts. 
They have scoured medical libraries for information about the hazards of breast 
implants and they show up at public seminars on breast augmentation to 
distribute flyers. 
Their group, HAD (after "Human Adjuvant Disease" -- the medical term for the 
mosaic of symptoms they share), is linked with a nationwide activist 
organization called Command Trust Network. 
Command Trust Network was founded last year by Kathleen Anneken of Covington, 
Ky., and Sybil Goldrich of Beverly Hills, both of whom had a common history of 
breast-implant problems and a desire to reach out to others. 
"We decided an organization had to be established to provide the kind of 
information not routinely given in physicians' offices but information that we 
believed was essential for a woman to make a completely informed decision about 
what she was putting in her body," Goldrich said. 
She complains that so far, Maryland is the only state in the country that has 
enacted legislation requiring physicians to inform women of the risks of breast 
implants through a standardized brochure. 
Joseph Arcarese, director of the FDA's office of training and assistance for 
medical devices, said two years ago an FDA advisory panel held hearings and 
determined that "patients are poorly informed." In response to the panel's 
request, he said the FDA has created committees representing consumers, 
physicians and the medical industry to write informational pamphlets that could 
be given to women considering breast enlargement or reconstruction after 
mastectomy. 
But as yet, he said, the members of the committees, which include 
representatives of Command Trust Network, have failed to reach a consensus on 
what should be said in the pamphlets, which are in their fifth draft. 
In addition, a growing number of women with breast-implant problems are suing 
the manufacturers. A small number of trial attorneys are taking on the cases, 
while Public Citizen is acting as an informational clearinghouse for 
plaintiffs. 
Public Citizen estimates that there are at least 200 product-liability lawsuits 
pending against silicone breast-implant manufacturers. 
Denise Dunleavy, a Manhattan lawyer, said, "I have eight cases and I could 
probably take hundreds more if I wanted to. There are so many women out there 
looking for attorneys that it is frightening." 
In 1984, a federal jury ordered Dow Corning Corp. of Midland, Mich., to pay 
$1.5 million in punitive damages and $211,000 in actual damages to Maria Stern, 
a Nevada woman whose breast implants made by that firm leaked silicone into her 
body after she had a mastectomy. Before the case was heard on appeal, Stern and 
Dow Corning reached an undisclosed settlement. 
Dan Bolton, a Redwood City attorney who worked on the Stern case, said he has 
since taken the cases of 10 to 15 other women with breast-implant problems. He 
said in five of those cases, the plaintiffs have received out-of-court payments 
to drop the litigation. So far, none of the cases have gone to trial. 
Bolton said that routinely, as part of such settlement agreements, the 
manufacturers insist that the size of the settlement payment and the documents 
that the plaintiffs have gathered to build a case against the manufacturers be 
sealed from the public. 
Said Bolton: "The purpose of that is to make it very difficult and financially 
burdensome for any other plaintiff attorney to take on a similar case (because 
it) precludes plaintiff attorneys from sharing information." 
Advocates of breast implants contend that litigation is triggered by greedy 
lawyers and a small group of hysterical women who are ill and looking for 
someone to blame. 
The American Society of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgeons recently reported 
the results of a survey of 592 women with breast implants showing that 92.5% 
were satisfied, while 82% said without a doubt that they would choose to have 
the surgery again. 
Also, while a study by Dow Corning showed that silicone produces cancerous 
growths in rats, Dow Corning and the FDA agree that this is not the kind of 
cancer to which humans would be susceptible. 
Robert Rylee, vice president of Dow Corning Corp., a major manufacturer of 
silicone gel-filled implants, said: "There is too much emotionalism that gets 
into this thing. What we really need is more understanding and true science. I 
think the medical community and manufacturers are doing everything they can to 
identify what can be done to increase our scientific knowledge." 
Rylee said that Dow Corning is trying to develop a national epidemiology study 
to determine if there is any link between silicone breast implants and 
immune-system disorders. A major difficulty, he said, is that the diseases in 
question -- lupus, scleroderma and rheumatoid arthritis -- have always been 
most prevalent in women between 20 and 55, the same age group most likely to 
get breast implants. 
"None of our scientific consultants or internal scientists or physicians have 
yet been able to show there is a causal relationship," he said. 
The most controversial implants are those covered with polyurethane foam that 
are marketed by Surgitek, a Paso Robles subsidiary of Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., 
the New York-based pharmaceutical and consumer-products giant. 
Garry L. Carter, vice president-general manager of Surgitek's plastic surgery 
division, said the polyurethane-coated implant "is probably the fastest-growing 
product in the industry," currently representing about 20% of all implant sales 
in the United States. 
However, Dr. Richard Caleel, president of the American Academy of Cosmetic 
Surgery, said: "There are a lot of cosmetic surgeons who do not use 
polyurethane-covered implants because they are not sure about what happens to 
the polyurethane." 
A study by Chris Batish, a biomaterials scientist and professor at the 
University of Florida, showed that the kind of polyurethane used by Surgitek is 
not favored for medical applications because of its tendency to disintegrate in 
the body. Once that happens, Batish said in a recent interview, "no one is sure 
where it goes." 
In addition, Batish said he found that in the laboratory, he could break the 
foam into chemical components that included the animal carcinogen TDA. 
Surgitek counters that the laboratory conditions used by Batish were much 
harsher than the environment inside the body. The company says studies that 
more closely approximate human biology show that the foam degrades very slowly 
and passes through the body without causing harm. 
Surgitek also says its research shows that the amount of TDA produced when the 
foam disintegrates is medically insignificant. 
The Canadian government has recently completed its own laboratory test of the 
foam and found no release of TDA, said Irwin Hinberg, acting chief of the 
research and standards division of Canada's Health Protection Branch. 
However, while neither the Canadian government nor the FDA believe that there 
is evidence to outlaw polyurethane-coated implants, both are advocating more 
studies. 
"Everybody is extrapolating (from laboratory tests). Nobody has tested what 
happens in the body," Hinberg said, adding that studies are under way to 
measure chemicals being produced in women who have had implants. 
But a few doctors and scientists believe there is already more than enough 
information about the dangers of breast implants to raise a red flag. 
Dr. Douglas R. Shanklin, a pathologist at the University of Tennessee, calls 
the silicone implants "an immunological and biological disaster waiting to 
happen." He said that some women with implants "go 5, 10, 15 years with no 
problem and then all hell breaks loose." 
Shanklin, who said he has seen silicone in the tissue taken from the thyroid 
glands and spleens of women who have had breast implants, said: "I think they 
should be taken off the market pending resolution of these problems." 
He added that the various immune-system diseases that women are reporting can 
be serious. "These are fatal diseases in time," he said. "Lupus destroys the 
kidneys and scleroderma can effect the heart and lungs." 
Michael Rensch, an assistant professor in the department of engineering 
mechanics at the University of Nebraska, said that implants are covered with a 
"highly elastic silicon rubber that can quite easily tear." He said he has 
"examined over 500 deflated breast implants" and has been retained by plaintiff 
attorneys in 50 to 60 cases to render opinions regarding manufacturing and 
design defects. 
"From all the pain and suffering I have seen, I wouldn't recommend anyone to 
use these devices from anyone or any company," Rensch said. 
UCLA's Shaw said that in the last year, he has seen a dozen women with breast 
implants who also have arthritis and various other immune diseases. 
"Right now, it is difficult to tell who has severe symptoms from the implants 
and who would have had them anyway. The causes of the diseases are a mystery," 
he said. Nonetheless, "you have to admit it looks awfully suspicious. . . . 
This is a subject I think should be looked at. We shouldn't brush these people 
off." 
