COUNTY COUNCIL FOR THE ARTS IS NEEDED; 
* ACTIONS IN COSTA MESA, GARDEN GROVE POINT UP THE JERRY-BUILT SYSTEM NOW IN 
USE 
When a representative from Orange County addressed the California Confederation 
of the Arts, the state's largest arts advocacy organization, at its annual 
convention in Los Angeles recently, the appearance itself was evidence for the 
message. David Emmes, producing-artistic director of Costa Mesa's South Coast 
Repertory theater, delivered a timely address on the need for a countywide arts 
council, so as to lend a stronger voice to the local arts community. 
Amen. And the fact that Emmes' address represented an about-face from an 
earlier decision not to accept an invitation to speak on "The Fight for Freedom 
of Expression" was eloquent testimony on the need for a better organized arts 
lobby in Orange County. Emmes had complained earlier that he had been given 
inadequate notice of the panel discussion and almost didn't participate. The 
opportunity to address the most important assembly in California on an arts 
advocacy question surely would not have been lost on an alert county arts 
council, which could have coordinated the effort to bring Orange County's arts 
funding wars to the attention of a larger audience. 
Indeed, Orange County has been having a rough time of it of late. The Costa 
Mesa City Council's approval last summer of arts-grant restrictions banning the 
use of city money for obscenity or religious or political activity cast Orange 
County in an unfavorable national light on the arts stage. That embarrassing 
chapter in county arts history itself might have been headed off if a county 
council had been in place to mobilize the region's arts community. 
Instead, Orange County had a jerry-built system for rescuing freedom of 
expression from the endangered species list. In Garden Grove, for example, the 
City Council took the view that Shakespeare was the equivalent of a foreign 
auto or high-tech electronics import, flooding the market and knocking out 
American products from competition. So it was left to an anonymous donor to 
give $10,000 to the Grove Shakespeare Festival, as well as a group of 
firefighters, a local hotel and small contributors, to keep alive Shakespeare 
for another day. A countywide arts council certainly could have helped spread 
and strengthen the safety net. 
The Board of Supervisors, struggling to meet a wide range of needs, earlier 
this year ruled out substantial funding for a council. But it's clear that 
somehow Orange County needs an organization to lobby for the arts and protect 
them from self-appointed censors. 
