COMBAT IN PANAMA; 
WASHINGTON KEEPING MOSCOW FULLY INFORMED ABOUT INVASION; 
FOREIGN POLICY: U.S. OFFICIALS HOPE CANDOR WILL HELP CLIMATE OF WARMER 
RELATIONS. 
American diplomats, hoping to foster a climate of warmer relations between 
Washington and Moscow, began keeping Soviet officials closely advised of the 
course of events in Panama days before the incursion and continue to brief 
Kremlin officials several times daily, U.S. sources in Moscow said Friday. 
The degree of communication between Soviet and American officials has occurred 
at all levels and took place with increasing detail and intensity at least two 
days before the American intervention into Panama, reflecting deep concern in 
Washington that nothing upset the new style of cooperation between the two 
countries. 
And, for the most part, keeping the Soviets closely advised is a tactic that 
has worked, according to American officials here. 
Despite the tough rhetoric coming from the Kremlin, Soviet officials have made 
it clear that U.S.-Soviet relations will not be damaged because of the military 
intervention, the American diplomats say. 
Dozens of Soviet citizens Friday expressed their anger over the events in 
Panama, demonstrating in front of the U.S. Embassy. Some carried signs that 
read "Hands Off Panama." 
For the third day in a row, the official Tass news agency made highly critical 
comments on the U.S. actions, saying: "American-style democracy is being 
imposed on Panama by army helicopters, tanks and armored carriers. . . . The 
White House has found itself isolated again." 
But stern statements by the government and in the official media, according to 
one senior U.S. official, are simply "a matter of image." 
"I don't think they are all that upset. But they don't want to be seen as being 
in collusion with us," the official said. 
That is particularly important for President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, who 
reportedly has been accused by conservatives of putting good relations with the 
West before ideological concerns. 
Georgy A. Arbatov, a key Kremlin adviser on East-West relations, called the 
American incursion "the best Christmas present the Americans could have given 
the Soviet military machine." 
It would strengthen the hand of those in Soviet military and political circles 
who argue that the Soviet Union should not move so quickly to make unilateral 
disarmament agreements, he told reporters during a break in the current session 
of the Congress of Peoples' Deputies. 
An attempt to deflect potential criticism from conservatives may be a key 
factor behind the tough wording of the official Soviet response to Panama, 
officials said. 
"We were a bit surprised by the tone and degree of their public criticism," one 
American political analyst said of the initial Soviet response to Panama. "It 
was more aggressive than we might have expected. 
"But, based on our private conversations, we see no long-term, substantive 
problems between Washington and Moscow because of this," the analyst said in an 
interview. 
A flurry of meetings "at a number of levels" were held in Moscow on Tuesday, 
before American troops intervened in Panama, one American diplomat said. While 
the Soviets were not provided with exact details of the American plans, "the 
news that we had sent in troops came as no surprise to them," the diplomat 
added. 
"We took the initiative to go in and provide an explanation," another senior 
official explained. "We didn't give them advance word about the operation 
itself, but we expressed our concern about the way things were developing." 
Soviet officials have refused to discuss their contacts with their American 
counterparts before the American intervention into Panama. 
Foreign Ministry spokesman Vadim P. Perfiliev, speaking at a news conference 
this week, declined to confirm or deny if there had been any contacts between 
American and Soviet officials before the invasion. 
"I am not authorized to comment on this matter," he said. 
The official media has reported that Gen. Manuel A. Noriega is targeted by the 
United States because of his nationalist views and has described the drug 
charges leveled against him as unfounded. 
But in private meetings with American officials, "the Soviets said they 
recognized Noriega was not a wonderful character," one U.S. source in the 
Soviet capital said. "They didn't say they thought it was right for us to send 
in troops, but their criticism in private was more mild than it was in public." 
While the Soviet Union does not share close relations with Panama and neither 
country has an embassy in the other's capital, Moscow's Communist ally Cuban 
President Fidel Castro is a staunch supporter of Noriega. 
"In the light of the Cuban position, Moscow could clearly not stand by and say 
nothing about Panama," one Western diplomatic analyst said. 
But, regarding the long-term effect on Soviet-American relations, the analyst 
said: "I see absolutely nothing that would suggest to me that they wish to 
carry this into other areas -- quite to the contrary, all other appointments 
are going on normally." 
And a longtime Soviet analyst agreed. "It is, without doubt, an irritant in the 
public arena," he said. "But it will not affect the course of Soviet-American 
relations." 
