HIGH SCHOOL NOTEBOOK; 
QUARTERBACK HARO THE UNSUNG HERO AT QUARTZ HILL 
Talk about making the most of an opportunity. 
The running game has garnered most of the attention for Quartz Hill High this 
season, but junior quarterback Jake Haro has established himself as a fourth 
threat in the Rebels' power I attack. 
The 5-foot-8 junior has mastered the big play through the air in addition to 
rushing for 290 yards. 
Haro has averaged just eight passes a game, but his 49 completions have amassed 
1,033 yards -- an average of 21.1 yards a completion. 
By contrast, Hart's Ryan Connors and Westlake's Todd Preston -- the area's two 
most prolific passers based on yardage -- averaged 14.6 yards a completion. 
Haro has thrown 13 touchdown passes, giving him a touchdown for every 3.76 
completions. By contrast, Preston threw a touchdown pass every 7.9 completions 
and Connors threw a touchdown pass every 6.45 completions. 
Haro's effort against Mater Dei on Friday underscored his big-play ability. He 
attempted only six passes in the Rebels' 37-7 victory but completed four for 
114 yards and two touchdowns. He threw an 84-yard scoring strike to Dehryen 
Mabry with 3 minutes 58 seconds left in the second quarter and a 24-yard 
touchdown to Rob Keller on the final play of the half. 
"I don't know, the adrenaline just gets to you," Haro said. "I just thought to 
myself, 'This is an important game, so I'd better have a good one for our 
coaches and for our seniors.' " 
Myth exposed: Canyon High football Coach Harry Welch was adamantly opposed to 
the Golden League's move from Division II to I this season, but now that the 
playoffs are almost over, Welch admits that his concerns were unwarranted. "I 
think we all bought into the Citrus Belt (League) and Orange County football 
myth," Welch said. "They play very good football down there, but so do we up 
here. I think the playoffs have proved that." 
Two (Quartz Hill and Canyon) of the four teams that qualified for last week's 
Division I semifinals were from the Golden League and only one (Mater Dei) was 
from Orange County. 
Huntington Beach Edison, the No. 4-seeded team entering the playoffs, was 
beaten in the first round, and Citrus Belt powers Eisenhower and Fontana, the 
Nos. 1- and 3-seeded teams, were eliminated in the second round by Mater Dei 
and Loyola, respectively. 
"I was surprised when (those teams) lost in the early rounds, but that was 
because of the hype," Welch said. "I saw Fontana on film, and they were a very, 
very good high school football team, but they weren't unstoppable. Loyola 
proved that. . . . I think the two best teams (Quartz Hill and Loyola) are 
still playing. That's why we have a tournament." 
New and improved: Taft senior linebacker Cornell Hill (6-1, 170) was in the 
midst of a superlative season when physicians detected a problem in his right 
forearm. Season-ending surgery was required to remove a large hematoma. 
Last Tuesday, Hill was granted medical clearance and he made an improbable 
return -- to the basketball court. Hill, who had not practiced with the 
basketball team, came off the bench to score 12 points in Taft's 79-56 opening 
victory over Poly. 
Although his arm was heavily taped, Hill was deadly from the free-throw line, 
making all six attempts. 
"I don't think he made that many all last year," Taft basketball Coach Jim 
Woodard said. "As a matter of fact, I think he shot about 48% from the line." 
Hobbling Bulldogs: Buena's basketball roster, which listed 10 players at the 
start of the season, dipped to six last week and left the Bulldogs barely able 
to conduct a practice. 
The latest victims were Doug Wilder (fractured wrist), Russell Rose (knee 
surgery), Joey Young (twisted knee), and Matt Egan (disciplinary reasons). 
The losses forced Buena Coach Glen Hannah to bring Matt McSorly, a 6-4 
sophomore, up from the junior varsity. But McSorly wasn't available to practice 
last Friday because he had played in the junior-varsity game. 
That same junior-varsity game also took most of the players Hannah needs for 
varsity practice. 
"We've had to go with our junior-varsity guys, which isn't our best, but it's 
all we can do," Hannah said. "Friday there wasn't a whole lot we could do with 
just six guys." 
Eight players were in uniform Wednesday for Buena's 74-67 loss to St. Anthony 
in the Loyola tournament. 
"It's tough, but the kids are hanging in there and they're looking a lot 
better," Hannah said. "It makes for some long practices, but at least we had 
eight bodies out there Wednesday." 
Add injuries: Channel Islands' Brian Schemelpfhing, a projected sixth man for 
the Raiders, suffered an ankle sprain and will miss the Nordhoff tournament 
this week. Schemelpfhing, a 6-3 senior forward, is expected to return next 
week. 
Jaqua out: Simi Valley's progress during the preseason was slowed last week 
when senior point guard Tim Jaqua, a returning starter, suffered torn ankle 
ligaments. 
Jaqua, who will be sidelined for at least three weeks, was expected to provide 
the inexperienced Pioneers with leadership, and his loss was evident during 
Simi Valley's shoddy offensive play last weekend. Simi Valley dropped two 
consecutive games in its tournament, the last a 62-61 decision to 
Douglas-Juneau (Alaska). 
"We just could not get into anything offensively," Simi Valley Coach Dean 
Bradshaw said. "Every time we scored, it looked like recreation ball. Getting 
Jaqua back will really help." 
It also will be a necessity if Simi Valley, which has won at least a share of 
the past five league titles, expects to cash in on Pick Six -- the slogan 
Bradshaw has attached to this year's goal. 
Slumber party: The Oak Park soccer team has been able to rest easier since the 
school's football team lost, 34-7, to Beaumont in the Southern Section Division 
IX playoffs two weeks ago. 
The soccer team had been practicing at 6 a.m. because the football team used 
the field in the afternoon. 
Soccer Coach Dick Billingsley, however, was not too thrilled about the loss -- 
Billingsley also happens to be the football coach. 
"(The soccer team) was a little more shocked that we lost than thankful," 
Billingsley said. "It's been pretty tiring waking up every morning. It'll be a 
little warmer practicing at 3 o'clock in the afternoon. I just wish the 
football season ended on a better note." 
Globetrotter: The success of first-year Oak Park basketball Coach Nate Sims 
could affect his performance on another job. 
Sims plays semi-pro basketball in Australia for five months of the year and is 
scheduled to leave for Australia on Feb. 19. 
The first round of the playoffs begins Feb. 15, and, if Oak Park advances to 
the semifinals scheduled 11 days later, Sims might have to revise his travel 
plans. 
"It's going to be tight," said Sims, who played at Santa Monica College and Cal 
State Long Beach in the late '70s and early '80s. "If we keep on winning, I'm 
going to have to cancel the flight and stay." 
Staff writers Steve Elling, Kirby Lee, Brian Murphy, John Ortega and Jeff Riley 
contributed to this notebook. 
