AIM OUR GUARDIAN EYE AT YOUNG, VULNERABLE; 
POLICE: LET POLICE MONITOR RELEASED CONVICTS, FREEING THE PROBATION STAFF TO 
WORK WITH TROUBLED KIDS BEFORE IT'S TOO LATE. 
Recent reports have confirmed that the school-dropout plague now extends down 
into junior high schools. It is more clear than ever that our schools are in 
serious trouble and need more help than is available within the education 
system. But public education is only one of the many vital institutions that 
are unable to keep pace with demands imposed on them by an increasingly complex 
and rapidly growing society. And just as the problems of schools, social 
services and criminal justice are interrelated, so should be the solutions. 
The workload of most institutions charged with keeping society on an even keel 
has increased enormously, while their resources have remained static or have 
been reduced. But merely increasing the resources of some of those systems as 
they are now configured would not enable them to serve the people adequately. 
The crises created by child neglect, drug abuse, school dropouts, gang violence 
and the growing population of career criminals clearly illustrate the need for 
us to re-examine what public agencies are doing to fulfill their commitment to 
society. 
I propose that we begin by re-examining the role of the criminal justice system 
with the intent of encouraging greater networking of its resources with other 
social systems. The Los Angeles Unified School District's enormous dropout rate 
is a prime example of a social disorder that the criminal justice system should 
be helping to address. 
As it now functions, the criminal justice system is missing the mark by an even 
wider margin than is the education system. Perhaps the Probation Department 
provides the worst-case example of a criminal justice agency overwhelmed by an 
impossible mission that prevents it from addressing tasks at which the chances 
of success would be much higher. Failure of the Los Angeles Unified School 
District to keep kids in school is alarming. But that failure pales in 
comparison to the Probation Department's inability to control its charges -- 
career criminals who are on probation. 
The reason for this failure is simple: The probation philosophy is outmoded. 
The system needs to be totally redesigned to direct the Probation Department's 
efforts toward the young and vulnerable population, including school dropouts, 
rather than toward society's dropouts. 
It's time we put the authority for enforcing the conditions of probation with 
the police officers who witness violations firsthand. It is ludicrous to assume 
that convicted persons will comply with probation conditions when one probation 
officer is trying to monitor hundreds of them. It would be far more 
intimidating for them to realize that all police officers are monitoring their 
behavior, are informed of the conditions of probation and have the power to 
enforce the conditions immediately. 
Rather than being perceived as an alternative to jail, probation status should 
be viewed as an extension of incarceration, an "out-prisoner" status. It is 
essential that the subject realize that he or she is still under the control of 
the criminal justice system through police monitoring. 
The benefits of these proposals are obvious. Families, schools and communities 
would support our efforts when they see that we have put some teeth back into 
the handling of out-prisoners, who constitute 80% of our convict population. 
This new approach would also encourage probationers to resist peer pressure, 
justifiably using the enforcement threat as reason to abstain from criminal 
behavior. 
Although this proposed change might initially place a greater burden on our 
jail facilities, it can reasonably be assumed that a stronger probation system 
would eventually reduce the need for additional prison facilities because 
probation would be a viable alternative to incarceration. 
This revision would also be a first step in addressing the issue of real 
rehabilitation. 
What is now called the Probation Department should not be downgraded in 
importance. Far from it. Rather, the department's mission should be redefined 
and its efforts redirected. 
The Probation Department's efforts are now aimed at the tail end of the 
criminal justice process; there, in dealing with society's failures, it has 
failed. where it has failed in dealing with society's failures. But with the 
police assuming much of the responsibility for monitoring the conduct of 
out-prisoners, probation officers could devote energy to preventing individuals 
from entering the criminal justice system. One good way to start would be by 
helping to keep 8,600 Los Angeles junior high students -- the number that 
dropped out last year -- in school. 
Youngsters identified by police, school officials and other agencies as "at 
risk" could be referred to probation personnel for counseling, training and 
other preventive measures. In other words, we can shift the focus of a powerful 
force toward the prevention of crime and diversion of our youth from criminal 
careers. 
Combining this considerable resource with educational and other social service 
providers in a coordinated effort could keep kids out of the justice system, 
reduce the school dropout rate, provide greater parental responsibility and 
control and improve the chances of many at-risk kids to share in the benefits 
of this wonderful country of which they are a part. 
