RESEARCHERS BRAVE COLD IN STUDY OF WARMING 
A scientist braved numbing subzero temperatures this summer to uncover more 
than 800 years of Earth's climate trends that may reveal whether the planet is 
warming up because of modern man's excesses. 
Dr. Kendrick Taylor of Reno's Desert Research Institute endured temperatures 
that plunged to 40 below zero Fahrenheit and occasionally warmed to freezing as 
he joined a team of American researchers on the six-week Greenland Ice Sheet 
Project 2. 
"We have to understand what happened in the past to test our theories and ideas 
about what will happen to the climate in the future," Taylor said. 
"This was the first year so we're still analyzing data and no great discoveries 
were made. But when the project is finished, this will definitely give us some 
help in answering the big question about the greenhouse effect." 
The Greenland project, funded by the National Science Foundation, is the most 
ambitious drilling effort ever undertaken by the United States and parallels 
studies by European nations and the Soviet Union. 
Project scientists plan to drill 10,000 feet down into the Greenland icecap 
that has remained frozen from the Earth's past ice ages to review a panorama of 
environmental history spanning 200,000 years or more. 
During this summer's first season on the project, Taylor said 24 scientists and 
workers drilled a hole 5.2 inches wide and more than 650 feet deep to unearth 
about 800 years of environmental history. 
"We were definitely working in harsh conditions; it got up to freezing one 
day," Taylor said. "But overall it was a good experience. And, believe it or 
not, the food was great. Some people gained weight." 
Scientists generally worked 10- to 14-hour days, he said, and did not have much 
time for recreation, although some hardy athletes set up a volleyball net for a 
few games. 
"We were pretty comfortable most of the time," he said. "We slept in heated 
tents that were about 10 degrees, and we have a few heated buildings for 
showers and an outhouse. 
"I haven't decided yet, but I think I'm going back next year. The project will 
last four three to four years." 
The scientists are exploring compacted ice at the base of the Greenland ice 
sheet that is composed of snow, dust and small amounts of chemicals from two 
ices ages ago. 
Traces of impurities in the ice layers provide a chronicle of changes in air, 
sea temperatures, precipitation, storm severity, biological evolution, man-made 
pollution and solar activity. 
Gases such as carbon dioxide and methane, which are thought to be contributing 
to the greenhouse increase in the Earth's average temperatures, can can be 
measured in the ice layers. 
NASA scientists have estimated that if humans do nothing to cut down on the 
current amounts of carbon dioxide pumped into the atmosphere, temperatures in 
the year 2050 will be six to seven degrees higher than they are today, 
producing enormous climate changes. 
The level of the ocean could rise anywhere from one to six feet as polar 
icecaps melt and the frequency and severity of storms would increase, according 
to NASA scientist James Hansen. 
Causes of the greenhouse effect include the use of chlorofluorocarbons in 
refrigerants and aerosols, burning fossil fuels such as coal and gasoline and 
cutting down forests and plant life that renew the Earth's oxygen supplies. 
The National Science Foundation is coordinating the U.S. Greenland Ice Sheet 
Project with the European Science Foundation, which is funding extraction of an 
ice core 20 miles away from the American project. 
The two ice cores from the Greenland Ice Sheet will let scientists compare and 
validate their data, Taylor said. 
The deepest ice core obtained by Soviet scientists at Vostok in the heart of 
East Antarctica was about 7,200 feet long and contained a record going back 
160,000 years or more. 
Taylor, a geophysicist with the Desert Research Institute's Water Resources 
Center, was the scientist in charge of electric conductivity tests on the 
Greenland Ice Sheet project this past summer. 
His research into the relative acidity in the ice has so far produced evidence 
of several volcanic eruptions near the summit of the Greenland Ice Sheet. 
"It's really amazing how much information you can obtain under studies like 
this," Taylor said. "You can pull gas samples out of the ice and tell what was 
in the air that day years ago." 
