U.S. OBSERVER TEAM PRAISES TAIWAN FOR CONDUCTING FAIR, FREE BALLOTING; 
ELECTIONS: BUT THE CONGRESSIONAL GROUP WARNS AGAINST ARRESTING OPPOSITION 
LEADERS. AND IT LISTS FLAWS IN THE VOTING PROCESS. 
A delegation of U.S. congressional observers Sunday praised Taiwan for having 
just conducted what the Americans called its most honest election in four 
decades, but they warned against any postelection arrests of opposition 
leaders. 
"Our key judgment was that this year's election was the most free and fair in 
Taiwan's history," the five-member delegation said in a statement released at a 
press conference. "On the other hand . . . we cannot say that, by any objective 
standard, it was fully free and fully fair." 
The statement listed uneven access to electronic media, limitations on free 
speech, legal restrictions on former political prisoners, possible election-day 
abuses and Taiwan's lack of a genuinely democratic constitutional structure as 
major areas of concern. 
The delegation also declared: "We believe it would be unfortunate if the good 
will, which has been generated through this electoral exercise, were dissipated 
in the days and weeks ahead by the harassment and arrest of candidates who have 
made controversial statements." 
In balloting Saturday, the opposition Democratic Progressive Party made 
significant gains against the ruling Nationalist Party. Competing for the first 
time in an election in which organized opposition parties were legal, the 
Democratic Progressive Party established a solid base of grass-roots political 
strength by taking control of the top executive position in six big cities or 
counties, including Taipei county, which surrounds the island's capital. The 
Nationalists won in 14 cities or counties, and an independent candidate took 
one mayor's slot. 
The Democratic Progressive Party, the island's only significant opposition 
party, also won 21 seats in the legislative Yuan. While far less than a 
majority -- the legislature is dominated by Nationalist Party members who did 
not need to face reelection -- this figure nearly doubled the opposition's 
previous strength, and for the first time, gives it enough seats to enjoy the 
legal right to introduce legislation. 
The election was marked by the strong impact of decades-long tension between 
the island's native-born majority and those who fled the Chinese mainland in 
1949 with the Nationalist government to escape the Communists. Taiwan's 
political structure is still based on the claim of the Nationalist government 
to represent all of China -- a claim the ruling party uses to avoid truly open 
national elections that might enable an opposition party to take over the 
island's government. 
At a jubilant victory rally early Sunday morning, You Ching, an opposition 
legislator who won the office of Chief Executive of the Taipei county 
government, worked an excited working-class crowd, using the Taiwanese dialect, 
which generally is understood only by the approximately 85% of the population 
with ancestral roots in Taiwan. 
You urged about 5,000 singing, clapping supporters to refrain from any violence 
protesting an unexpected delay in releasing official results of the Taipei 
county race, but to continue their rally until authorities formally confirmed 
his victory. The rally ended peacefully shortly after 3 a.m., when You was 
officially named the winner in the most important race of the election. 
A similar scene in the city of Tainan developed into a tense standoff outside 
county government headquarters that lasted well into the day Sunday, according 
to reports from that southern city. About 2,000 Democratic Progressive Party 
supporters gathered to protest alleged vote-rigging, which they charged was 
costing their candidate victory. 
However, the crowd dispersed early today when the losing candidate, Li 
Tsung-Fan, said that the street protest should end but that the dispute would 
be taken to court. 
Tsai Shih-yuan, deputy secretary general of the Democratic Progressive Party, 
said at a Sunday press conference in Taipei that the opposition will challenge 
the results in four races -- Tainan county, Nantou county, Taichung city and 
Hsinchu city. 
Tsai also expressed optimism that authorities will not attempt to imprison any 
of a group of Democratic Progressive Party candidates who during the campaign 
openly advocated a formal declaration of Taiwanese independence from China. 
While Taiwan functions in most ways like an independent country, the 
Nationalist government in Taipei and the Communist government in Beijing agree 
that the island legitimately is part of China. The two regimes certainly argue 
over which government is the proper ruler of China. 
Many leaders of the Democratic Progressive Party would prefer to end this 
situation by declaring a Republic of Taiwan, but under Taiwan's national 
security law, it is illegal to say anything publicly in favor of such actions. 
Rep. Stephen J. Solarz (D-N.Y.), chairman of the House subcommittee on Pacific 
and Asian affairs, and head of the congressional observer group visiting Taiwan 
for the election, said in a brief interview after Sunday's press conference 
that he and his fellow congressmen are concerned about talk that some 
opposition candidates who publicly took a pro-independence stance might soon be 
arrested. 
Tsai, at the opposition party's press conference, expressed confidence that the 
government will not dare to make such arrests. 
"We believe there will be many cases under investigation, but we do not expect 
prosecutions," Tsai said. "I don't think the KMT (Nationalist Party) is that 
stupid." 
