DEFENDANT CONFESSES AT BRAZIL MURDER TRIAL; 
CRIMINAL JUSTICE: RANCHER'S SON ADMITS HE KILLED RAIN-FOREST ENVIRONMENTALIST 
CHICO MENDES IN 1988. 
A 22-year-old rancher's son confessed Wednesday that he killed famed 
rain-forest activist Chico Mendes, bringing a surprising end to the opening 
session of a closely watched murder trial. 
Darci Alves Pereira stunned a packed courtroom by admitting he shot Mendes on 
Dec. 22, 1988, shortly after dark outside his home in this remote Amazon town 
near the Bolivian border, 2,650 miles northwest of Rio de Janeiro. 
Pereira's confession came minutes after he had twice denied shooting Mendes, 
who was one of Brazil's most outspoken critics of development of the Amazon 
basin. Mendes' case has reached such proportions that film producers and 
authors have besieged his widow with competing offers to tell his story. 
Pereira, whose father also is charged with plotting the murder, faces a 12- to 
30-year sentence. Sentencing is expected today. 
The trial has drawn worldwide attention as a test of Brazil's commitment to 
protecting its rain forests against encroachment and to meting out equal 
justice for rich and poor. 
Mendes, who defended the rain forest from landowners and ranchers who want to 
cut it down to develop the fragile basin, has become a symbol of Brazil's poor 
and landless. 
Ilzamar Mendes, widow of the activist, was sitting in the gallery when the 
confession occurred. She clapped her hands in surprise. 
"He confessed?" she asked incredulously. "It's hard to believe." She added, 
"He's probably doing it to protect his father." 
Pereira's father, rancher Darly Alves da Silva, also is on trial on charges of 
planning the shooting. He has pleaded innocent. 
Mendes had repeatedly told police that Da Silva was plotting to kill him, after 
rubber tappers prevented the rancher from clearing a tract of rain forest. 
The trial began at 9 a.m. A boy picked the names of seven jurors out of a hat 
containing 21 slips of paper with local residents' names on them. 
Outside, two dozen state police troopers in army camouflage pants and 
bulletproof vests stood guard with submachine guns and pistols. Officials 
feared violence between rubber tappers and gunmen reportedly hired by ranchers. 
Da Silva, 54, wearing an unbuttoned blue shirt, slacks and thick glasses, was 
called to the bench. He denied accusations he had plotted Mendes' death and had 
ordered his son to carry it out. 
Then Pereira approached the bench and also denied the murder charge against 
him. He claimed he was in another town when Mendes was killed. 
The short, muscular Pereira was shown evidence found by police near where 
Mendes' killer hid: a 16-gauge shotgun, a black nylon raincoat, a burlap sack, 
two bottles and cigarette packs. Asked if he recognized the items, Pereira 
shook his head. 
Then, as bailiffs were leading Pereira from the courtroom, Judge Adair Longhini 
leaned over the bench and asked once again if the defendant had committed the 
crime. 
Pereira paused, stared at Longhini and said, "I confess." 
"What?" said the judge. "You killed Chico Mendes?" 
"I shot him, yes," Pereira said. 
