HOLLYWOOD PARK; 
SADLER IS MAN WITH SPEED TO SPARE 
Meet John Sadler, a young man with horses in a hurry. 
At 34, he has established himself as a training whiz with thoroughbred 
whirlwinds. One racing reporter has called him, "King of the Sprinters." Since 
the statistics backed up such high praise, Sadler gladly accepted the title. 
Since 1988, Sadler's stable of high-class sprinters has won 10 Southern 
California stakes, set two track records and established several stakes 
records. And all this has been accomplished with something less than the 
blue-blooded, Kentucky-bred bullets typified by Dayjur, the European speed 
demon who came within a vaulted shadow of winning the Breeders' Cup Sprint in 
October. 
Sadler's front line -- all of them gelded and wearing chestnut red -- consists 
of Valiant Pete, a homegrown Cal-bred; Olympic Prospect, a former claimer; and 
Frost Free, a $50,000 yearling who did not make it to the races until he was 4. 
Like a bridge master mulling over a grand slam hand, Sadler will play Cal Cup 
Sprint winner Valiant Pete this Saturday in the Hollywood Turf Express at 
Hollywood Park. But just in case it rains enough to force the race onto the 
main track, Sadler has recent Underwood Handicap winner Frost Free ready to 
roll as well. 
In the meantime, Sadler is preparing Olympic Prospect for a third comeback in 
the Palos Verdes Handicap during the first week of the Santa Anita season. The 
son of Northern Jove will turn 7 next year, but with the exception of Phone 
Trick and Chinook Pass, no California-based sprinter of the last decade has 
been more brilliant than Olympic Prospect. 
Certainly, no top sprinter has spent more time in rehabilitation. 
"He's his own worst enemy," Sadler said earlier this week as he reviewed 
Olympic Prospect's career. "He's almost too fast for his own good. I'm 
reasonably certain he can be as good as he ever was. He's never been abused, 
never had a joint injected. But how long he lasts is up to him." 
While Olympic Prospect is a hard-nosed old pro with a nasty streak, Valiant 
Pete is a big puppy. 
"He's a barn pet," Sadler said. "They call him Baby Huey. He's a big guy but 
very sweet. That's why he was gelded as a yearling -- he was so massive that it 
looked like there would be no way he could stand training." 
The last time Valiant Pete ran six furlongs on the Hollywood turf course, he 
suffered a minor shin fracture. That was on July 6, 1989. He was sent to the 
farm of owners Pete Valenti and John Coelho to recuperate, then developed a 
severe colic condition. Surgery was required to save his life. 
Valiant Pete won four of seven starts before his injury, and since his return 
last June has won twice and been second three times in five tries. Besides the 
Cal Cup Sprint, his most recent race on Nov. 3, Valiant Pete won the Mt. 
Harvard Handicap at the Los Alamitos thoroughbred meeting in August. Blink and 
you missed it. 
The race was at 4 1/2 furlongs, a 990-yard dash that took Valiant Pete only 49 
1/5 seconds to run. The world record for the odd distance had been 50 2/5, a 
mark held by nine horses at six tracks. 
"When I heard about that race, I just drooled," Sadler said. "It was perfect 
for him. Afterward, somebody said that I could have been a great quarter horse 
trainer if I'd gone that route." 
The Pasadena native seemed destined for the thoroughbreds, however. He rode his 
family's show horses as a teen-ager, then dabbled at college before diving 
head-first into race track life. Sadler groomed horses for trainer Tom Pratt, 
spent 1 1/2 years with Dr. Jack Robbins as a veterinarian's aide, then worked 
as an assistant with trainer Dave Hofmans before taking out his own license and 
heading north to the San Francisco Bay Area. 
Sadler admitted that he was not an overnight success. 
"I remember having to borrow money from my father in '82 to pay the feed man," 
Sadler recalled. 
By the mid-1980s, Sadler was on his way. In 1986, he trained Melair, the 
exciting white filly who upset Preakness winner Snow Chief at Hollywood Park. 
He took Olympic Prospect to the Breeders' Cup Sprint in 1988 and '89. And this 
year, his stable will hit an all-time high of nearly $2 million in earnings. 
"Am I impatient about getting better horses? Yes and no," Sadler replied. "Like 
a lot of trainers out here, my stock is gradually improving. But I'm not much 
of a heavy self-promoter. I figure if I keep doing well, the good ones will 
come." 
Sadler is ambivalent about his "sprint king" reputation. 
"It's nice to be known for doing something well, but I don't consider myself 
typecast," he said. "Look at what's been said about some others: Charlie 
Whittingham can train only European turf types -- so he wins two Kentucky 
Derbies. Wayne Lukas can't train for grass -- so he's got a turf champion. I 
think if you can train, you can train." 
