SOVIETS REJECT PLAN FOR GERMAN REUNIFICATION 
The Soviet Union on Tuesday rejected West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl's plan 
for German reunification, sharply criticizing it as an attempt to dictate to 
East Germany and warning that efforts to press the issue could destabilize all 
of Europe. 
Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze, backed by President Mikhail S. 
Gorbachev and other top Kremlin leaders, made clear that Moscow strongly 
objects to Kohl's 10-point plan for gradual, step-by-step unity as trying to 
determine the outcome of the political, economic and social reforms now under 
way in East Germany. 
Meeting with Hans-Dietrich Genscher, the visiting West German foreign minister, 
the Soviet leadership issued its strongest and most formal warning yet to the 
West not to intervene, even indirectly, in the tumultuous changes taking place 
throughout much of Eastern Europe. 
Noting both Moscow's commitment to political self-determination and its 
strategic interests in Eastern Europe, Shevardnadze bluntly told Genscher that 
Bonn's reunification proposals, however phrased and oriented toward the distant 
future, already constituted interference in East Germany's internal affairs. 
"The Soviet side considers it unacceptable to dictate to the sovereign state of 
the German Democratic Republic on how it should develop its relations with the 
other German state," Shevardnadze told Genscher, according to an account of 
their conversation from the official Tass news agency. 
"The leadership of the German Democratic Republic has taken the road of broad 
reforms, profound renewal and democratization of the country's public and 
political life," the Soviet foreign minister continued. "A huge amount of 
constructive work lies ahead, and it will require time. 
"In this period, every side should preserve restraint and wisdom and should 
avoid interfering in the internal affairs of the German Democratic Republic, 
either by words or actions." 
Any attempt by the West to accelerate the changes, Shevardnadze warned, would 
have "unpredictable consequences," endangering the reforms under way there and 
elsewhere in the region. 
The Soviet Union is undoubtedly more concerned about East Germany, its key ally 
in Eastern Europe, than over developments in other socialist countries in the 
region. But Shevardnadze's outspoken and sometimes quite tough comments were 
intended, according to informed Soviet sources, as a broader warning to the 
West about trying to direct or influence the political, economic and social 
reforms now under way in the region. 
The Kohl plan, presented last week to the West German Parliament and then to a 
meeting of North Atlantic Treaty Organization leaders on Monday, envisages 
step-by-step cooperation between East and West Germany through the creation of 
joint institutions. The eventual result could be a federation of the two states 
within a united Europe. 
Genscher said that Kohl has no timetable and favors an evolutionary process, 
but he repeated Bonn's undiminished hope of a reunited Germany. 
Addressing a news conference, Genscher said he had sought to reassure 
Gorbachev, Shevardnadze and other Soviet officials on Bonn's intentions. 
"We have never left any doubt that we are aware of our special responsibility 
for stability in Europe," Genscher commented. "Our national fate is embedded in 
the fate of Europe. That means there is not going to be a separate 'German 
cause.' " 
Reunification would require the active consent of both German states, he said, 
and would have to come as part of a broader East-West rapprochement and a 
general easing of tensions there. 
"Under no circumstances will we take advantage of the difficulties arising 
inevitably from this situation in Eastern Europe," Genscher said, pledging that 
Bonn will not push its vision for the future of Europe but will not relent in 
its propagation either. 
