ENDPAPERS: TURNING THE WORDS LOOSE IN PRAGUE 
After 20 years of enforced obscurity Vaclav Havel, Czech playwright 
extaordinary, has exploded onto the television screens of his country and ours. 
No one looks more uncomfortable in the political arena than Havel; he would 
clearly be happier back in the theater, rehearsing one of the dozen or so plays 
he has written since the 1968 Soviet invasion. There are those who feel that 
the production of Havel's plays -- none, new or old, has been allowed on the 
Czech stage for 20 years -- would mean more than all the recent shuffling in 
the political stratosphere. 
A few weeks before the shuffling began, Havel received another in his growing 
collection of literary awards. The award, given yearly by the Assn. of German 
Writers to the author who has contibuted most to world peace, is traditionally 
presented at the Frankfurt Book Fair, the annual clearing house for world 
publishing (it exhibited 378,699 titles this October). For the first time in 
the history of the award, the recipient could not attend the ceremony: Havel 
has declined all invitations to leave Czechoslovakia because while the regime 
has been known to let dissidents out, it has never been known to let them back 
in. 
Havel's acceptance speech was read by actor Maximilian Schell, who has long 
been associated with the playwright. (West Europeans have regularly seen his 
plays staged, and Angelenos are not far behind, largely thanks to the Mark 
Taper Forum and its director, Gordon Davidson, a personal friend of Havel's.) 
The speech emphasized the power of the word, harking back to "Two Thousand 
Words," the Prague Spring reformers' call to action, which was singled out by 
the Soviets as particularly subversive. In a country where the Soviet invasion 
has been referred to only as "the events" and the return to Stalinism has gone 
by the name of "normalization," words can be a matter of life and death. 
The 53-year-old Havel has spent a number of the post-invasion years in prison 
for his efforts to set words right, and the German writers were honoring him 
for his "exemplary and persuasive attempt to live in truth." On this occasion 
he chose to discuss a word that has come to be used lightly in our century, 
especially in Eastern Europe. "Words have their history," he said. "There was a 
time, for instance, when entire generations of the humiliated and oppressed 
considered the word socialism a magnetic synonym for a more righteous world, 
and when the ideals expressed by the word led people to sacrifice many years of 
their lives and even life itself for it. I don't know how things stand in your 
country, but in mine the very word socialism has long since turned into a 
rubber truncheon that nouveau riche bureaucrats who believe in nothing use to 
beat their free-thinking fellow-citizens while calling them 'enemies of 
socialism' and 'anti-socialist forces'." 
Another of Havel's words with a history is the word history itself. The 
communist regimes claim to represent a science of history governed by the laws 
of dialectical materialism. For them history is moving inexorably forward to 
the utopia that is communism. In his 1975 "Open Letter to President Husak" 
(Husak took over after the Soviet invasion and still holds certain honorary 
positions), Havel accused the regime of calling history to a halt. "True, the 
country is calm," he wrote, "calm as a morgue." The regime fostered entropy, 
order without life, and dressed it up as history. Since the regime had absolute 
power, it could do what it pleased to language as easily and surely as it could 
do what it pleased to people. 
Not surprisingly, Havel is obsessed with history much as he is obsessed with 
words, and he combines his two magnificent obsessions in several plays by 
returning to works with a past. Like Brecht, he has reworked John Gay's 
"Beggar's Opera," and his "Temptation," recently at the Taper, represents a 
stunningly topical yet non-reductionist extension of the Faust legend: The 
devil can't hold a candle to the bureaucrats. In works like these the present 
resonates with history, and history is something Havel takes seriously. If he 
rejects the Communist march of history toward a radiant future, he is 
nonetheless wary of the tendency to dismiss history as absurd and therefore 
worthless. He would certainly agree with Santayana's oft-quoted adage: "Those 
who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it." 
On the other hand, Havel has been through too much to assume that merely 
remembering history will repeal the sentence. So back we come to words and, 
more specifically, to the debasement of language that Havel bemoans as much as 
he does the distortion of history. Take "The Memorandum," one of the few Havel 
plays currently available in paperback here. The action begins with a series of 
nonsense syllables. They turn out to be a new language. One bureaucratic agency 
has required another bureaucratic agency to introduce a language with no 
ambiguity; that is, a language with a single word for a single concept. "And 
now I shall name some of the most common interjections," says the teacher 
engaged to teach the language. "Our ah becomes zukybaj; our ouch, bykur; our oh 
becomes hajf dy doretop, pish is bolypak juz, and the interjection of surprise 
well! -- zyk! However, well, well! is not zykzyk!, as some have concluded, but 
zykzym." By choosing interjections, Havel reduces an already ridiculous idea to 
total absurdity (what document will need the word pish?) and makes a point 
about language that holds by analogy for history: It cannot be transformed into 
a set of positivist, absolute, right-or-wrong principles. 
Because "The Memorandum" opened in 1965, it could open in Prague, and clearly 
Havel would have preferred to go on communicating with his audience from the 
stage. (The above excerpt gives only a faint idea of how hilariously 
stageworthy that play truly is.) When the "events" and "normalization" closed 
his country's theaters to him, he continued writing plays -- he was 
constitutionally unable to do otherwise. But the plays could only be staged 
abroad; they could not reach their primary public. To reach that public, Havel 
resorted to another genre. 
Plays are best read in conjunction with performance, but essays are 
self-contained and thought-provoking and can circulate with relative ease in 
clandestine carbons. Havel became an essayist in spite of himself as he became 
an activist in spite of himself. Both aspects of this new life came to a head 
with the formation of Charter 77, the Czechoslovak opposition's response to the 
Helsinki Agreements and by now the longest-lived human rights organization in 
the East bloc. 
As Charter 77's first spokesman, Havel often found himself exhorting his 
fellow-countrymen to do more or less what he was recently praised for in 
Frankfurt, that is, to "live in truth," stand behind what they think and do, 
vouch for themselves, take responsibility for their own acts. His 
fellow-countrymen soon watched him go to jail for his principles. He did not 
convert large numbers of them. As he points out to his wife in the edifying and 
moving prison diary "Letters to Olga," he realized that his stand made him seem 
a martyr to some and a goody-goody to others; it may even have diminished his 
influence. Again he was constitutionally unable to do otherwise. 
Perhaps that is why he has emerged from it all with his faith in humanity 
intact. "I am not interested in why man commits evil," he writes in the 
Letters; "I want to know why he does good (here and there) or at least feels he 
ought to." Once the political situation in Czechoslovakia is on an even keel, 
Havel will doubtless abandon the political platform for the stage; he will go 
back to writing plays that explore why man does good. Let us do what we can to 
keep them on our stages, and let us hope audiences in his own country will soon 
be able to see his repertory in its entirety. The amazing events of the past 
few weeks can have left only the most cynical unconvinced of the possibility of 
change. To them I say, with Havel: "Half dy doretop, bolypak juz!" 
