PROFESSOR SAYS PESSIMISTIC TREND MAY BOTTOM OUT 
Although 44% of residents surveyed think that Orange County will become a worse 
place to live, UC Irvine professor Mark Baldassare believes that a trend of 
pessimism about the future may be bottoming out. 
Changes respondents are willing to make in their lifestyles to protect the 
environment -- such as conserving water, recycling and supporting 
transportation alternatives as well as freeway construction -- bespeak a sense 
that people can improve matters, said Baldassare, who released the results of 
the 1990 Orange County Annual Survey on Monday. 
"We're seeing the beginning of a new trend in which people are feeling that 
they can do something about the environment," Baldassare said. "And they are 
feeling that perhaps things can be done about traffic and uncontrolled growth." 
To be sure, those who believe that things are going "badly" in Orange County -- 
25% -- now outnumber those who say things are going "well" -- 22% -- among the 
1,017 adults surveyed in September. The negative rating has increased 12 
percentage points since 1987, while positive attitudes dropped 15 points over 
the same period. 
Worries about traffic, the lack of affordable housing and a dramatic decline in 
consumer confidence all play to that pessimism. At the same time, Baldassare 
noted, the survey shows a willingness to support transit alternatives such as 
light rail, as well as building new freeways and new lanes on existing 
freeways. 
Adding to that, survey respondents say they are more often conserving water, 
recycling trash, buying environmentally safe products and limiting driving. 
And although local consumer confidence has plummeted in the wake of the Persian 
Gulf crisis and the nation's downward economic spiral, the median income of 
respondents increased 9% over the previous year. More than half of those 
surveyed expressed confidence that it would rise again in 1991. 
"Orange County is doing pretty well economically," Baldassare said. "There are 
obvious pockets which have serious difficulties, and there are people with 
serious worries about the future. For young residents, for example, . . . there 
are great concerns about high housing costs. For older residents, health care 
appears to be a pressing issue. But people in general are doing pretty well." 
Local government, now armed with gasoline tax funds and the half-cent sales tax 
increase approved with Measure M last month, is poised to make strides in 
curbing traffic congestion and holding down the impact of development. Could 
increased optimism about the future be far behind? 
"People are feeling there are things they can do that will make a difference," 
Baldassare said. "And perhaps they are feeling that things aren't as dismal as 
they appeared to be a few years ago." 
ORANGE COUNTY ANNUAL SURVEY 
Personal Threat of Environmental Problems 
How seriously do you view them? 
Very serious: 60% 
Somewhat Serious: 31% 
Not Too Serious: 8% 
Don't Know: 1% 
Personal Sacrifices to Improve the Environment 
What do you do often? 
Limit Driving: 35% 
Buy Environmentally Safe Products: 52% 
Recycle: 68% 
Conserve Water: 76% 
Source: 1990 Orange County Annual Survey, UCI 
