STOLEN FRENCH ART FOUND IN CUPBOARD 
Twenty-eight French masterpieces seized by the Nazis during World War II, 
including paintings by Monet, Renoir and Gauguin, have been found in a cupboard 
at a Berlin museum, a news magazine reported Thursday. 
This week's cover story in L'Express described how the works -- seized from 
private citizens between 1942-44 -- have been locked away since 1972, their 
existence known to only a handful of people. 
According to the magazine, the Department of French National Museums learned 
the works existed in 1975, but "was not interested because the works did not 
come from national collections." 
"Never did the prestigious department think of consulting its experts or 
glancing through the catalogues of the artists in question," L'Express wrote. 
The paintings included Claude Monet's "Route, Effet d'Hiver. Soleil Couchant 
(Road, Effect. Sunset)"; Eugene Delacroix's "Jeune Homme (Young Man)"; Auguste 
Renoir's "Coco Ecrivant (Coco Writing)"; and Paul Gauguin's "La Falaise (The 
Cliff)." They were examined by l'Express reporters who said they were in 
excellent condition. 
Sylvie Poujade, a French museum spokeswoman, told the Associated Press her 
department learned of the paintings' existence a month ago, when contacted by 
l'Express reporters. 
"We searched our archives and did not find proof that the department had ever 
received a list of works from Berlin," Ms. Poujade said. 
Ms. Poujade said that French museums are considered "depositories of state 
property which they are expected to conserve and display in good condition." 
"Our role is not to track down art works not considered state property. That's 
the job of other government offices," she said. 
The magazine quoted Lothar Brauner, curator at the Nationalgalerie, in formerly 
East Berlin, as saying he received the works on May 19, 1972, from an 
unidentified person claiming to have gotten them from a third party. 
A legal document drawn up that day shows that the person wished to hand over 
the paintings "so that they would be properly preserved until being returned to 
their rightful owners." 
Brauner said he did not know who the rightful owners were. 
According to l'Express, French museum authorities were informed the works were 
in Berlin by the French Foreign Affairs Ministry, itself contacted by East 
German authorities. 
L'Express recounted how Brauner and his wife, a restoration expert, locked the 
paintings in a yellow, wooden armoire and equipped it with a pail of water and 
a hydrometer to measure the humidity. From time to time, they would take out 
the paintings and check their condition, the magazine wrote. 
