POP MUSIC REVIEW; 
IN THE END, FUNK GIVES CROWD A HOT FOOT 
It had shaped up as a classic showdown: Irresistible funk meets the immovable 
audience. 
In his first full tour since the glory days of Parliament-Funkadelic, William 
(Bootsy) Collins, the self-proclaimed No. 1 Funkateer, was faced Sunday night 
with the task of inciting a dance frenzy between the wall-to-wall tables of the 
typically stoic Coach House. 
Midway through the set, Collins and his eight-piece Rubber Band had dug a 
visceral groove with blasts of spine-jarring, soulful funk, tapered with smoky 
blues ballads. But the crowd's response swelled no further than warm applause, 
scattered chants of "Boot-say" and a few sightings of gyrating torsos amid the 
seated throng. 
Many of the stops had long since been pulled: Collins and saxophonist/stage 
manager had repeatedly pleaded for action, and lead guitarist Gary (Starchild) 
Schider had stripped down to a diaper. But still, nothing. Bootsy had already 
used up his first costume of fringe, glitter and glitz and retired backstage to 
change into another. Through Round 1, the House of Stoicism had undauntingly 
prevailed. 
Upon Collins' return -- clad in a silver-studded white robe bearing the 
likeness of Casper the Friendly Ghost -- signs of activity finally began to 
surface. Upon his shedding the robe -- exposing a turquoise, black and silver 
zebra-striped outfit complete with Bootsy's usual goofy array of accessories -- 
an enthusiastic handful of fans shed their inhibitions and finally took to 
their feet. 
The epiphany followed soon after. 
During the unveiling of a new song, "Funkiest Mothers in the Universe," 
Collins, flanked by Schider and Parker, waded into the crowd -- a diverse mix 
of ages, races and styles -- slapping hands and urging them to "touch 
somebody." 
Where earlier attempts to infuse funk into some feet rang stilted and contrived 
-- such as Parker's command to "free your mind and free your (behind)!" -- this 
gesture of genuine affection shattered the barricade between artist and 
audience. 
The entire less-than-capacity crowd succumbed to dance. One patron, apparently 
inspired by Schider, dropped his pants. And a young boy wearing a Kid Frost 
T-shirt jumped on stage and displayed some appreciated moves. 
The Coach House had been overpowered by funk. 
Even after lulling back into the ballad, "I'd Rather Be With You," Bootsy's 
Rubber Band from that point forward was in command, rekindling the fervor 
repeatedly, at will. 
Although Collins has spent most of the past decade in a hiatus from music, he 
and his band proved that they could rediscover the soul of P-Funk days. 
The music has broadened only slightly from its 1970s mold, and Sunday's show 
was occasionally overridden by cliches, gimmickry and ego. But remarkably, the 
performance never hinted of the pathetic retro-endeavors common among many of 
Collins' rock and pop contemporaries who are still chugging away. 
Considered against the backdrop of 1990s music, the brand of funk Collins 
helped to forge assumes a revived relevance. By recapturing the spirit of his 
original sound, Collins' performance unearthed the influences he has drawn 
upon, as well as those he has cast forth. The playful, energized show by turns 
was reminiscent of Sly Stone, Hendrix, Prince, Living Colour, the Red Hot Chili 
Peppers and Collins' most obvious devotee, funk-satirist Blowfly. 
In addition to the sonic pops from Bootsy's trademark, star-shaped, glittered 
beast of a bass, his Rubber Band mates were impressive. The horn section of 
Fred Wesley and Parker, along with backing vocalist Gary (Mudbone) Cooper, 
supplied steady doses of soul, while rhythm guitarist Mike Hampton ventured 
into intriguing dimensions of groove and feedback. Keyboardist Trey Stone and 
percussionist Roger Hampton offered steady support for Collins' rhythms, and 
Schider provided some titillating fretwork -- several ill-advised, monotonous 
solos notwithstanding. 
As Collins and his octet were leaving at the end of the 100-minute set, Bootsy 
led the crowd in chants of "Keep funk alive!" 
As evidenced by Sunday's victory over the reluctant crowd, Bootsy's Rubber Band 
is clearly doing its share to fulfill that aim. 
For that matter, so are the Limbomaniacs, who opened the show. The New 
York-based quartet scorched through a pulsating, eight-song set, expanding upon 
the bold rap-funk-rock hybrid staked out on its critically acclaimed debut 
album, "Stinky Grooves" (on which Collins also plays). 
Although dominated by cover tunes, including a sinewy version of "Brick House," 
the Limbomaniacs' set proved an invigorating prelude to Collins, providing 
enough punch and spark to overcome the early passivity of the audience. 
