THOSE WITHOUT JOBS HELP COUNSELORS HANG ON TO THEIRS 
Mark Alch, an Irvine employment consultant, is getting more last-minute notices 
about layoffs at his client companies these days. One recent Wednesday, he 
received a fax informing him that an Orange County hospital planned to lay off 
10 workers the following Monday. 
He quickly asked three of his outplacement job counselors to clear their 
calenders and prepare for the task of soothing angry workers and helping them 
find new jobs. 
As the economy continues to weaken and layoffs rise, companies that provide 
employee counseling and job search services are benefiting from brisker 
business. Alch, a senior vice president at the Irvine office of Drake Beam 
Morin Inc., a New York-based outplacement consulting firm, said he has 25% more 
executives and at least 75% more lower-level people using his services than 
last year. 
The increase is making for busier days. "We very rarely get a call saying, by 
the way, in three months we're going to do some downsizing," Alch said. 
His office is one of about 30 outplacement firms in the Southland feeling the 
effects of growing joblessness in the aerospace and defense, electronics, 
financial services and other industries. 
Bill Ellermeyer, senior vice president of New York-based Lee Hecht Harrison 
Inc.'s office in Irvine, said his firm has seen an increasing number of layoffs 
in 1990 and more senior management job cuts. Although senior managers are 
finding jobs, it is taking longer: an average of 6.5 months compared to 5.8 
months a year ago, he said. 
Outplacement firms report that corporate cutbacks began to rise in the fall of 
1989 and have accelerated in 1990. Lee Hecht's New York office predicts that 
they will continue through next summer. 
"Nearly all industries are downsizing," said Robert Hecht, the company's 
co-chairman. "Even blue chip companies and firms that are not in trouble are 
revamping operations and finances." 
Robert McCarthy, president of a Century City outplacement firm, said some 
senior managers laid off from large corporations are settling for jobs with 
smaller firms or starting new careers. One former manager of a solar products 
company, for example, decided to open a video store in Ventura County. 
Some big corporations have hired outplacement firms to prepare their employees 
for job cuts. 
Alch, of Drake Beam, was hired by General Dynamics, the giant defense 
contractor, to help plan for the consolidation of its Pomona and Rancho 
Cucamonga plants. General Dynamics has said it will lay off 1,500 to 2,000 
people in the Los Angeles area by the end of 1991. 
The project presents some special problems because General Dynamics notified 
employees of its layoff plan so far in advance. "Your best performers are the 
people who will bolt first during a downsizing, and the people who remain will 
be jittery," he said. "It's up to us to be on site, talking to people, 
measuring their mentality, to keep up internal morale." 
But Alch warns against looking for jobs with competitors. "It's easy for 
competitors to squeeze that individual like an orange and throw away the rind," 
he said. 
