REAL ESTATE Q &amp; A: HOW TO AVOID OVERPAYING FOR HOME DURING 'BARGAIN' 
HOLIDAY SEASON 
QUESTION: I recall you said some time ago that the best time to buy a home is 
between Thanksgiving and New Year's, so my husband and I intend to get a good 
deal on a home now, hopefully from an anxious home seller. We have been 
religiously going to weekend open houses almost every week for the past month. 
However, two things worry us: The realty agents almost dare us to make an 
offer; they try to get us to them give our financial details and seem to be 
obstacles rather than helping us, and we've seen similar homes in the same 
neighborhoods that are priced as much as $15,000 apart. How can we avoid paying 
too much and get agents working for rather than against us? 
ANSWER: You are wise to buy a home during this season when only the most 
motivated home sellers have their houses actively on the market for sale. If 
you wait until spring to buy a home, then you will be competing with the droves 
of home buyers who come out of winter hibernation. 
But don't let the realty agents intimidate you. Many agents can be extremely 
helpful. You just encountered a few agents who didn't seem anxious. Remember, 
most real estate agents represent sellers, so you are on your own when buying a 
home. That statement will cause me to get nasty letters from a few adamant 
agents who claim to represent buyers, but I think that concept is usually not 
very effective. 
When I inspect a property for possible purchase and the agent asks me about my 
down payment and finances, I politely reply, "I have enough to handle the 
purchase." But I never disclose my financial status to a real estate agent. 
Only a lender making me a mortgage loan is entitled to that confidential 
information. Some agents insist on getting their prospective buyers to reveal 
their finances because it saves their time, but I disagree and do not think 
that is very smart. 
As for avoiding paying too much for a home, before you make a purchase offer, 
insist that the realty agent prepare a written "comparative market analysis" 
form for you. This is the same form the seller received when listing the home 
for sale. It reveals recent sales (not asking) prices of similar nearby homes 
and the asking prices of comparable neighborhood homes. Based on this vital 
information, you can make an intelligent purchase offer without paying too much 
for your home. 
Adding Apartment Makes Little Sense 
A: The lot where our single-family home is located is zoned for up to two 
dwelling units. Several neighbors have added second units to their properties. 
My wife and I have obtained architectural plans for a rental unit. Two builders 
have bid on the modest plans. If we borrow the funds to build the extra 
apartment, I figure we will be lucky to break even on the rental income and 
added mortgage payment. Do you think we should add the extra rental? 
A: No. I am constantly amazed at the homeowners who think it will add more 
value than it costs to build two or more apartments on their property. What 
good does it do to spend perhaps $30,000 adding an apartment to your property 
if the increased market value will only be around $30,000? 
As many owners have discovered, a single-family house usually has more 
marketability than does a two-, three- or four-unit rental property. Real 
estate agents often try to sell me houses that have multiple zoning by saying, 
"You can add another unit to the property." That may be true, but it doesn't 
make sense to spend $1 building a second unit just to add $1 in market value. 
Of course, if you can spend $20,000 to add $40,000 of value, then it would be 
profitable improvement. 
Home Not Selling? Maybe It's Overpriced 
Q: Our house has been listed for sale almost 90 days. The listing is about to 
expire. We have had no purchase offers, but the realty agent seems to be doing 
a good job. I think we should renew our listing for 30 days with the same 
agent, but my wife thinks we should switch to a better company as we must get 
our home sold by February. What should we do? 
A: The primary reason your house has not had any purchase offers is it is 
probably overpriced. Unless the agent has such a bad reputation that other 
agents refuse to cooperate, the fault is probably with the price rather than 
the agent. 
Ask the agent to prepare an updated "comparative market analysis." This form 
shows recent sales prices of similar neighborhood homes and asking prices of 
listed comparable homes (your competition). Only after you have this 
information can you decide if you home is overpriced. 
Since you have until February to sell your home, I suspect you overpriced it, 
thinking you can reduce the price in the future. But home buyers and real 
estate agents are not dummies. If your home is overpriced they won't waste 
their time inspecting it. If you sincerely want to sell your home now, my 
suggestion is to renew your listing with your present agent but adjust the 
asking price to a realistic level. 
Unhired Agent Wants Sales Commission 
Q: Several months ago, I casually told a real estate agent that I might be 
interested in selling a downtown commercial building I own. About a week later, 
I received a phone call from a man who said the agent had told him about my 
property. I showed it to him and he made me a purchase offer which, after some 
haggling, I accepted. The sale has closed. Now the real estate agent claims I 
owe him a $46,000 real estate sales commission. But this agent had nothing to 
do with the sale other than mentioning my building to the buyer. Do you think I 
owe the agent a commission? 
A: No. The statute of frauds requires real estate listings and sales commission 
agreements to be written to be legally enforceable. Since you had no listing 
agreement, when an open listing is involved the realty agent must prove he was 
the "procuring cause" by a chain of events that led to the sale. 
If the agent sues you for the sales commission, I doubt he could win. However, 
morally I think you might feel better if you paid the agent at least a partial 
sales commission. 
How to Cancel a Listing With Agent 
Q: We made a bad mistake. A sharp-talking real estate agent conned us into 
signing a six-month listing for the sale of our home. She put our listing into 
the multiple listing service, held a tour for local realty agents, advertised 
one weekend open house and has hardly shown the house since then. No purchase 
offers so far in the two months our home as been listed. 
I met a much better real estate broker who owns the largest brokerage in our 
town, and he said our agent has a very bad reputation among local agents and 
they hate to show her listings, so she gets little cooperation from other 
agents. We are very disappointed in our agent. She never calls us to let us 
know how things are going. We would like to switch to a better agent. How can 
we do so? 
A: Your letter is a too typical situation where a home seller signs up for a 
long listing and then hardly hears from the agent again. Now you know why I 
recommend 30-, 60- or 90-day listings. 
The first step to cancel your listing is to have a talk with your realty agent 
and her broker. If you can't work out a satisfactory arrangement for 100% 
enthusiastic cooperation to get your home sold, request to have the listing 
canceled for lack of diligence by the agent. 
Should the agent refuse to cancel, ask to have the listing transferred to the 
realty agent you prefer. By transferring the listing, the original agent will 
get a referral commission when your house sells. If your agent refuses to 
transfer the listing to a better agent, consult a real estate attorney before 
canceling the listing. However, such cancellation might incur a lawsuit for a 
sales commission, so be careful. 
Survey Says Garage Is on Neighbor's Lot 
Q: We bought our home about 25 years ago. Last year, the house next door was 
sold. The nice young couple who bought it had a survey made. It says my garage 
is located about one foot on their side of the property line. This garage was 
built almost 35 years ago when our house was constructed. The new neighbor is a 
lawyer and he says I will have to move my garage off "his" property because he 
doesn't want me to acquire title by adverse possession. What should I do? 
A: Consult a real estate attorney. It sounds like your new neighbor doesn't 
understand real estate law. 
To acquire title to another's property by adverse possession you would have to 
occupy the neighbor's entire property openly, notoriously, hostilely and 
exclusively while paying the real estate taxes for the required number of 
years. 
If your garage has encroached on your neighbor's property for 35 years, 
presuming his survey is correct, you appear to be entitled to acquire a 
prescriptive easement. To perfect your rights, you would need to bring a quiet 
title lawsuit to acquire a prescriptive easement to that one-foot strip of your 
neighbor's property. 
Houses Are the Best Investment Today 
Q: My father made several million dollars profit by purchasing apartment 
buildings and holding them for many years. He started out in the mid-1960s. But 
I am not sure apartment buildings are the way to make profits in real estate 
today. What do you recommend? 
A: As a former apartment building investor, I understand how your father earned 
his profits in the 1960s and 1970s. However, owning and managing apartments 
today is not as easy and profitable as it once was. I shifted in the mid-1970s 
to investing in single-family rental houses and have been very pleased. 
My suggestion is to invest in sound, run-down, well-located single-family 
houses that can be upgraded by making profitable improvements, such as 
painting, cleaning, landscaping and modest repairs. Avoid houses that need 
major but unprofitable repairs, such as a new roof, foundation work, plumbing, 
wiring and structural upgrading. After you upgrade the house, aiming for a $2 
increased-value profit for each $1 spent, you can decide to either hold the 
house for long-term investment (called a "keeper") or sell the house for 
immediate profit (called a "flipper"). 
Letters and comments to Robert J. Bruss, a San Francisco-area lawyer, author 
and real estate broker, may be sent him at P.O. Box 280038, San Francisco 
94128. 
