SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA'S ENVIRONMENT AT THE CROSSROADS; 
ENERGY: ASSESSING ITS ROLE; 
RISING DEMAND KEEPS PRESSURE ON RESOURCES 
How we produce and consume energy has a major impact on the environment. 
Transportation by far accounts for most of our energy use, upward of 70% to 
80%. And motorists in Southern California buy more gasoline and drive more 
miles than anywhere in the country. So it's no surprise that motor vehicles and 
oil refineries, which spew forth pollutants and toxic chemicals, are a major 
source of environmental problems. 
In addition, ocean drilling for crude oil and transporting petroleum to 
refineries hold the threat of spills that would damage marine life. On land, 
plumes of leaked petroleum contaminants move from refineries toward ground 
water supplies. Also, more than 5,000 underground fuel storage tanks are 
believed to be leaking in Southern California. 
Our stewardship of electricity and natural gas also has an impact on the 
environment. Conventional power plants -- 455 in the Los Angeles Basin, 
including major utilities and small, co-generation units -- burn fuel oil and 
natural gas to generate electricity, all of which add to air pollution. Nuclear 
power plants produce radioactive wastes that must be stored for thousands of 
years. Hydroelectric dams tame wild rivers and flood scenic areas. 
By far the biggest contribution to reducing pollution has been the generation 
of "negawatts" -- reducing our electricity demands through conservation. 
Insulating homes or using more energy-efficient appliances and lighting are 
examples. 
Standards Toughened 
Still higher-mileage cars are in the works. Federal fuel economy standards are 
being toughened to conserve energy. There is a push for vehicles that run on 
cleaner fuels, like methanol, natural gas, and electricity. 
Despite conservation measures by residents and industry, natural gas 
consumption in Southern California is expected to grow 2% per year through the 
year 2000 because of population growth. 
The same scenario holds for electricity use, driven by the twin forces of 
population growth and increasing demands for air conditioning. 
Also, energy conservation measures, while important, do not necessarily 
contribute to cleaner air locally. About 80% of the electricity used in the Los 
Angeles Basin is generated outside the area, such as the Pacific Northwest and 
New Mexico. 
The reliance on imported electricity is expected to gradually increase in the 
years ahead. To the extent that such electricity is generated by coal, oil or 
natural gas-fired power plants, we are, in effect, exporting our pollution. 
