COLUMN ONE; 
PROBLEMS FLOW INTO AMAZON; 
WHILE WORLD CONCERN FOCUSES ON BRAZIL, THE HEADWATER AREAS OF THE ANDES FACE 
EVEN MORE THREATENING DEVASTATION. 
Like the waters cascading from the Andes Mountains, problems and hopes are 
pouring downstream into the Amazon jungle basin from the highlands that give 
life to the world's mightiest river. 
All along an immense crescent from Venezuela through Colombia, Ecuador, Peru 
and Bolivia, covering a distance of more than 3,000 miles, the Amazon finds its 
strength. Nearly one-third of the Amazon Basin lies in the rim of Latin 
American countries surrounding Brazil. 
While world concern homes in on Brazil's struggles over the development and 
conservation of its rain forests, the countries whose waters feed the river are 
attempting, more quietly, to cope with equally daunting dilemmas. 
Indeed, in several ways the array of problems facing the headwaters of the 
Amazon is more complex, and more threatening, than in Brazil itself. 
While the Brazilian settler's trek westward from the Atlantic can mean a 
2,000-mile journey, the reverse migration from the Pacific side of the 
continent rarely is longer than a few hundred miles. With limited open space 
and exploding populations, these poor, indebted nations see their Amazon 
interior as an escape valve and a potential economic salvation. 
But the Andes plunge down into jungle so suddenly -- with elevation changes of 
12,000 feet or more within a few dozen miles -- that problems like erosion and 
river-silting from deforestation take on frightening proportions. 
Conversations with dozens of officials, scientists and residents in the region 
underscore a web of crises at the headwaters: The rush to develop oil reserves 
has opened up hundreds of miles of roads, bringing a crush of settlers and land 
speculation; illegal coca fields on steep hillside jungles in Peru and Bolivia 
feed erosion, and cocaine processing pollutes rivers with tons of illegal 
chemicals; restive native Indians are chafing over relentless encroachment, and 
deforestation is proceeding at a dizzying pace. 
The conflicts result in part from the delicate landscape in the countries where 
the Amazon is born. Tiny highland brooks form the river's most tender veins. 
The headwaters then plummet down jagged canyons through fragile cloud forests 
that are among the world's wettest climates and richest ecosystems. 
The waters already have swelled into powerful rivers by the time they descend 
from the eastern Andes slopes into tropical rain forest -- as much as 1,000 
miles before joining the Amazon's main artery in the relatively flat jungle 
across the border in Brazil. 
The mountains feed the rivers a rich diet of minerals, which leach into the 
soils downstream on the lowland river banks during flooding. That makes the 
land relatively attractive for farmer-settlers, in contrast to the often poorer 
jungle soils in Brazil. The geography also has left deposits of oil, gold and 
other riches in the jungles at the foot of the mountains -- all magnets for 
development. 
With a hodgepodge of sometimes conflicting and often ill-enforced policies in 
hand, governments surrounding Brazil are attempting to control the rapid 
colonization and exploitation of their Amazon regions. At the same time, their 
awareness of ecological hazards is haltingly taking hold. 
Environmentalists, a growing force in these countries, are waving danger flags. 
They are also moderating their anti-development stance into a more realistic 
approach of sensible, controlled development. 
"The crises in the economy and the environment are closely linked here, and 
people are beginning to realize it," said Antonio Brack Egg, a leading Peruvian 
ecologist. "We have abused, looted our resources to a terrible degree. We have 
cleared 8.5 million hectares (21 million acres) of the Amazon in Peru, and 6 
million hectares are abandoned. We must make that land productive instead of 
clearing more. What we desperately lack is planning." 
Peru and Ecuador face the gravest threats. Peru has 16% of the basin, the 
largest outside Brazil, and the basin makes up 60% of Peru's territory. Roughly 
10% of the 300,000 square miles of the Peruvian basin has been cleared of 
forest. 
Ecuador, though far smaller than Peru and containing just 2% of the basin, 
confronts a comparatively greater array of pressures, in part because its 
population density and growth rate are the highest in the region. In search of 
space and a future, its people eye the vast expanse of green below the 
mountains. Only about half of the Ecuadorean basin remains forested. 
Road Was Lacking 
Five years ago, there was no road along the south bank of the Napo River, one 
of Ecuador's major Amazon tributaries. Jungle native families of the Huarani 
and the Quijos Quichua tribes hunted and farmed a few acres, and colonists -- 
usually poor Indians themselves from the Andes highlands -- pushed downriver 
from Puerto Napo, their progress slowed by the lack of transport other than 
outboard-powered dugout canoes. 
When the 25-mile dirt road was opened from Puerto Napo to Ahuano, hundreds more 
settlers followed. They were ceded 125-acre tracts by the colonization program. 
The Huarani fled to the interior, and the Quijos Quichua quickly sought to 
legalize their traditional holdings, with mixed success. 
The result is a sudden patchwork of bare-bone farms, reached by lumbering buses 
that come three times a day. Loggers are felling 2-foot-diameter hardwood 
trees. Thousands of acres of virgin rain forest have disappeared. 
Francisco Tapuy, a native who runs the 50-pupil primary school in the newly 
constituted village of Atahualpa, said, "The colonists have brought more 
advanced agricultural techniques, which is positive, but they also teach us 
crime, social conflict. They exploit, they take the land by force, they don't 
pay. The natives know how to exist on the land without destroying it." 
He said the 300 families, mostly natives, carefully chose the name for their 
town: Atahualpa was the 17th-Century Inca leader who resisted capture by the 
Spanish colonists in Peru. 
"There is no room here for more colonists," Tapuy said. "We are already seeing 
some erosion." 
He pointed to a bare patch on a cleared hillside where a landslide had 
occurred. "Civilization is arriving," he said. 
Many Got Land Titles 
Between 1964 and 1982, 12,838 settlers and 4,343 natives received land titles 
in the Ecuadorean Amazon. Many more applications, which usually take years to 
process, are in the works. 
A major source of anger for the natives, and for conservationists and planners 
in Quito, the capital, is the principle that underlies the development program. 
The law once required settlers to clear 80% of their land in two years to win 
ownership. The rule has been eased, but the concept still prevails in practice. 
Thus, the natives who use the forest without cutting it down are penalized, 
while settlers who arrive and clear land for farming are awarded title more 
easily. 
Further encouraging deforestation is the timber-harvesting policy, which 
determines royalties on the amount of wood actually cut, rather than the 
harvestable volume on a given tract. 
Both the land title and timber policies "have had a devastating impact on 
tropical forests in the provinces of northwest and Amazonian Ecuador," said a 
study conducted for the U.S. Agency for International Development (AID). 
Although environmental laws are numerous, "the problem in Ecuador is an 
inconsistent and uncoordinated application. . . . The result is a myriad of 
legal conflicts brought on by conflicting jurisdictions, ill-defined policies, 
unclear objectives and the failure to systematically apply even the best of 
environmental laws." 
Flavio Coello of the forestry protection program in the Agriculture Ministry 
said land speculators buy up tracts, sell the logging rights and report figures 
far below what they actually cut. 
"For lack of a clear political policy, we haven't been able to stop it," he 
said. "The ownership of land in this country is in chaos." 
Coello has just four park guards to protect the entire Yasuni National Park, 
which covers 2.5 million acres in the Amazon basin. "To try to enforce control 
there would be like trying to empty the sea," he said. 
Coello said colonization has already begun along the edges of Yasuni, but he 
added: "We can't blame the colonists with their 50 hectares. The fault lies 
with the government and its failure to impose order. It's as if they are in a 
trance." 
Ecuador's Amazon boom coincided with the discovery and exploitation of major 
oil reserves in the early 1970s, and few people suggest that an impoverished 
country can or should ignore such a vital source of income, even in national 
parks. 
Coello, however, expressed anger at the government oil company and several 
foreign firms, including Los Angeles-based Occidental Petroleum, whose 
exploration block includes a corner of Yasuni Park. He said the firms have 
refused requests to provide minimal assistance to pay for guards and research 
that would prevent oil exploration from leading to deforestation. 
In contrast, he said, Conoco has agreed to provide substantial aid after 
suffering international criticism for its planned road into Yasuni for oil 
production. 
David Neill of the Missouri Botanical Garden, who has worked in Ecuador's 
jungles for four years, said that Conoco, Union Oil of California and Petro 
Canada all are supporting scientific research during their oil exploration, but 
others have not come forward to help. 
Fernando Ortiz, an ecologist who advises AID, estimated that about 300 miles of 
roads have been built since the early 1970s, mostly for jungle oil production, 
"without consideration of Indian interests, the environment, anything." 
Roads are far easier to build in jungle areas nearer the Andes than Brazil 
because the rivers bring down gravel deposits needed to keep the roads from 
becoming impassable. Farther downstream, gravel is unavailable, and it must be 
hauled in for road-building at high cost. So road development and colonization 
have been easier near the headwaters of the Amazon. 
Deforestation is occurring in Ecuador at a rate of 2.3% a year, costing up to 
850,000 acres a year, including 187,500 acres of virgin forest, according to 
the study done for AID. 
For those charged with development in the region, however, roads are the 
solution. Asked to name the No. 1 priority for the Napo River area, land title 
office secretary Juan Leonardo Mera said: "Highways. This is the fundamental 
basis of growth. With roads, the people work harder, plant more yuca, coffee, 
and the costs drop because they can take out their products." 
The land title office, one of six in the Amazon, approves about 200 new titles 
a year. Of the total 1.43 million acres in its area, the office has carved up 
834,000 for development, while 307,000 acres are set aside as protected zones. 
Ivan Romo, an Agriculture Ministry land analyst, said the timber industry, not 
the small colonist, is the real villain in deforestation. 
"They can clear 50 acres in two months, and they have no programs of 
forestation. Then the destruction starts, the soil weakens and erosion sets 
in." 
Romo's department recently began a program to provide residents with seedlings 
to reforest fields. 
Army Takes Role 
Hugo Ramiro Landazuri, governor of Napo province, said the government is using 
the army at checkpoints to control colonization, stop land speculation and 
reduce frictions between natives and settlers. The Napo region, with a total 
population approaching 300,000, has grown so fast that it was split into two 
provinces this year: Napo itself, with the capital at Tena, and Sucumbios to 
the north, with the capital in the oil town of Lago Agrio. 
The governor said he opposes further colonization, preferring to focus on 
better use of the land already cleared. "We also have hydroelectric potential 
(and) we have marble and gold. These can be developed carefully. 
"The natives believe that the whites and mestizos (mixed-race people) are 
invading and taking their land," he said. "But it is also necessary that the 
poor Ecuadoreans from the highlands have a chance to thrive. We are a small 
country, and we need to grow." 
For the natives, such talk merely suggests further encroachment. Ruben 
Calapucha, a 28-year-old leader of the provincial Indian federation 
representing about 25,000 natives in the Napo area, reminded a visitor: "The 
land is our culture, our essence, our history, our survival." 
The native group is less concerned about colonists than the land agency and 
large companies. "We say that if a foreign company comes in and takes away our 
riches, then we at least want those companies to meet the many needs of these 
communities -- putting up schools, community centers, health clinics. We want 
the government to make these things part of the contract, Calapucha said." 
Even the save-the-Amazon movement has indirectly hurt the natives, Calapucha 
said. "They say this is the lung of the world, so they have created reserves 
where they won't give us titles. But we have been here for generations!" 
The population in the Amazon areas of Peru and Ecuador has surged at nearly 
double the national rate in the last 15 years, with the greatest growth right 
at the foot of the Andes and on the slopes of the mountains. That growth, and 
the discovery of oil in the late 1960s in both countries, nourished the 
off-and-on dream of conquering the jungle. 
One of the primary architects of the dream was former Peruvian President 
Fernando Belaunde Terry, who envisioned a highway, never built, through the 
western Amazon from Colombia to Paraguay. The concept reflected the importance 
of the Amazon to the countries whose mountains create it. 
Much of Belaunde's road would have passed through highland jungle and cloud 
forest on the slopes of the Andes. One portion of the road was built, through 
Peru's Upper Huallaga Valley, with disastrous consequences. 
During a recent flight over the valley in a police helicopter, a visitor saw 
hundreds of plumes of smoke rising from the floor and precipices as farmers 
cleared new fields. If the past pattern holds, much of the space will be 
devoted to coca fields. 
The Upper Huallaga is the largest single source of the leaf used to make 
cocaine. Estimates of coca plantations there range as high as 450,000 acres, by 
far the largest crop in the Peruvian Amazon. Because it is illegal, although 
largely unmolested, coca is grown on the least suitable terrain, according to 
Marc J. Dourojeanni, a professor at the National Agrarian University in Lima. 
Bolivia, which contains about 12% of the Amazon basin, is the No. 2 coca 
producer after Peru, with much of its uplands jungle similarly affected. 
Colombia is a far smaller coca grower and under less jungle settlement 
pressure, but it has major cocaine-refining operations. 
Dourojeanni said in a report that coca fields alone may have caused 10% of 
Peru's deforestation in the Amazon in this century. 
"Ecologically, coca is located in some of the most fragile life zones of the 
country, some of which are the least apt for agriculture," he wrote. Coca is 
grown between 2,000 and 6,500 feet on unterraced hills, extremely susceptible 
to erosion. Some erosion is gradual, with up to 300 metric tons of soil washed 
away each year per 2.5 acres. Some is catastrophic. 
Fatal Landslides 
Deadly landslides kill dozens, and sometimes hundreds, of people each year in 
Peru's valleys, often blocking roads for days. 
Coca growers use herbicides that wash into rivers, but far worse is the 
discharge of chemicals used in the refining process -- as much as 57 million 
liters of kerosene and 32 million liters of sulfuric acid per year in Peru. 
Two national forests and several parks have been partially invaded by coca. 
Dourojeanni noted that coca is being adapted to grow at lower altitudes, and 
new road construction could "disperse the coca growers through the entire 
Amazon region," just as the construction of the Jungle Highway in the Upper 
Huallaga by Belaunde brought coca to that area. 
As in Ecuador, Peruvian environmentalists blame conflicting policies and lack 
of government control. And many insist that the consequences of problems at the 
origins of the Amazon threaten its entire course to the Atlantic. 
"People are always harping about the lowland jungle and Brazil, but the cloud 
forests are twice as important," said Tony Luscombe, an American ecologist who 
has lived in Peru for years. "When you take off the trees, you start the 
erosion, which causes flash floods and clogs the rivers. Things are happening 
here with a vengeance, and nobody's raising a voice." 
Luscombe said oil companies are already having trouble moving materials by 
barge in some areas because silting from erosion had reduced river depths. 
"The government is giving incentives to get people roaring off into the jungle 
to avoid having to solve the problems in the sierra (mountains), where they 
originate," he said. 
Jorge Caillaux Zazzali, president of the Peruvian Society of Environmental Law, 
complained that the Amazon Treaty signed by countries in the region has merely 
become a device to fight off industrialized countries who oppose Amazon 
destruction. He said the treaty needs teeth imposing obligations on each member 
and "forming the basis for planned and balanced development." 
If Peru pollutes upstream and thus hurts Brazil, the Brazilian government 
should be empowered under the treaty to force a response, he said. 
Gustavo Suarez, technical director of Peru's Foundation for the Conservation of 
Nature, said that while Peru has taken steps to protect its forests through a 
national plan for sustained use, a contradictory law was passed in January 
pushing colonization and industrial development of the lowland jungle. 
Once again, Suarez said, the government has ignored the repeatedly demonstrated 
fact that the paltry soils are unsuitable for cattle ranching and monoculture, 
or single-crop farming. With the new policy, "it is very probable that new 
areas will be opened for the cultivation of coca and drug-trafficking, 
especially after the colonists encounter impoverished soils and cannot sustain 
themselves any other way." 
More recently, to the relief of the environmental lobby, the government has set 
up a commission, including non-government and native groups, to draft a broader 
strategy for Amazon development. 
In the far southeastern corner of Peru, the Madre de Dios River region contains 
some of the richest and most diverse virgin rain forests of the Amazon. In the 
first expanse of flat jungle after the mountains and hills have subsided, 
immense trees form a canopy so thick that no photographs can be taken in the 
constant dusk below. 
Tree roots branch out like flukes 30 feet from the trunks of the largest trees. 
Native people know how to drink water from tree fruit and use wood chips as 
insect repellent. On the grounds of the riverside Cuzco Amazonico Lodge, an 
estimated 120 mammals roam, and one visiting scientist counted eight species of 
bats. 
Jose Dominguez, the lodge manager for the last 10 years, said growing 
eco-tourism has helped encourage protection of the Amazon by generating badly 
needed foreign income. But he worries about settlers who are pushing up against 
his borders. And he worries about the gold dredgers now appearing on the river. 
"Maybe I won't be alive, but someday. . . . " 
Dominguez trailed off, leaving unspoken his fears for the future. 
