TECHNIQUE PROMISES SAFER DETECTION OF BIRTH DEFECTS 
A safer, easier technique -- involving only a tablespoon of a mother's blood 
taken as early as eight weeks into a pregnancy -- is being developed in Boston 
to test for hidden genetic disorders in a fetus. 
Now, if women are troubled by the idea of possibly carrying a genetically 
damaged fetus in utero, there are only two ways to settle the question, and 
both are invasive and have a degree of risk. 
Amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling require withdrawal of fluid or 
tissue from areas close to the developing fetus. Neither can be done very early 
in the pregnancy. CVS has a 4% incidence of complications. Amniocentesis has a 
lower rate, 0.5%. 
Dr. Diana W. Bianchi, a neonatologist-geneticist at The Boston Children's 
Hospital and principal investigator in the research, described the new 
technique as "preliminary but promising" recently at the American Society of 
Human Genetics conference in Baltimore. 
The technique, which could become available within a few years, would test for 
genetic disorders that have been identified at the DNA level -- cystic 
fibrosis, sickle cell anemia, thalassemia, phenylketonuria, Duchenne's muscular 
dystrophy -- and possibly even screen for Down's syndrome and other chromosomal 
disorders. 
The test relies on the presence of fetal red blood cells that "leak" from the 
placenta -- the structure in the uterus that nourishes the fetus -- into the 
maternal bloodstream. 
By examining these cells with highly sophisticated equipment, Bianchi and 
colleagues from the Harvard Medical School and the Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute also hope to find clues -- or the answer -- to why a fetus can grow 
without being rejected by the mother. 
"If you transplanted a kidney into somebody, they wouldn't accept it, but a 
baby is like a transplant," she said. "We don't know this -- and this is only 
speculation -- but if the constant leakage of blood from the baby into the 
mother somehow suppresses the mother's immune system, it may be related to 
tolerance of the pregnancy." 
When researchers obtain the mother's blood sample, they do a "density 
centrifugation," which separates different cells according to their size and 
weight. Then they use an antibody that recognizes certain proteins on the 
surface of the cells. 
The advent of a new tool, polymerase chain reaction, which amplifies genetic 
material in the sorted cells and can turn a few rare cells into millions of 
cells, has given the research a tremendous boost, the specialist said. 
"We're taking a tablespoon of blood from the mother and looking for the 
presence of the rare fetal blood cells that cross the placenta and end up in 
the mother's bloodstream," Bianchi said. 
"Once we identify the cells as being fetal, then we can analyze the genetic 
material in the cells. So a cell from a fetus, whether it's a blood cell, a 
chorionic villus sample or a skin cell from an amniocentesis, has the same 
genetic information." 
The benefit of the fetal cell sorting technique is that it poses "zero risk" to 
the fetus, as opposed to amniocentesis "where you're sticking a needle into the 
womb," or CVS, "where you're sticking a catheter into the womb," she said. 
Before the technique can become available to pregnant women throughout the 
country, more work needs to be done. Technical factors have to be refined, but 
these are not "impossible problems," according to Bianchi. 
