NO YELLOW-BRICK ROAD TO INSURANCE REFORM; 
CALIFORNIA: THE RACE FOR STATE COMMISSIONER DRAWS FEW INCUMBENTS; THEY SEE IT 
AS A 'LOSE-LOSE' JOB. A 'PEOPLE'S CZAR' IS UNLIKELY TO MAKE CHANGE. 
If you liked "The Wizard of Oz," you'll love the race for California insurance 
commissioner. 
That's doesn't mean the sweeping insurance reform approved by voters last year 
is the stuff of children's fiction. The public's frustration over soaring 
premiums was real. That is why Proposition 103 passed -- to cut rates, crack 
down on insurers and require that the state's insurance commissioner be 
elected. 
The initiative's proponents argued that neither the Deukmejian Administration 
nor the Legislature could be trusted to clean up the insurance mess. Special 
interests -- particularly the insurers and attorneys whose contributions 
finance political campaigns -- would continue to block relief. 
Electing the insurance commissioner, supporters promised, would make that 
office more accountable and responsive to policyholders' concerns and help 
"ensure that insurance is fair, available and affordable for all Californians." 
Skeptics worried that an elected commissioner "would be a politician first and 
a regulator second," because of the need to raise campaign money from the same 
interests the office regulates. 
The voters opted for change. But more than a year after passage of Proposition 
103, full implementation is still stalled, the 20% rollback requirement has 
been overturned by the state Supreme Court and few people have seen rate 
reductions. Roxani Gillespie, Gov. George Deukmejian's appointed insurance 
commissioner, has been agonizingly slow in putting a new insurance system into 
place. So the focus of reformers, the media and ambitious politicians has 
turned toward election of a "people's insurance czar" in 1990. Will this be the 
magic formula to bring about elusive reform? Or will that office fall prey to 
the temptations of "business as usual"? Early dynamics of the race for 
commissioner offer clues. 
Three things have become readily apparent. Among the active potential 
candidates, traditional politicians are scarce. There appears to be a dearth of 
Republicans vying for the office. And candidates are making promises that 
should be carefully examined by California voters. 
In the wake of the 1988 election, Gillespie firmly asserted, "I have no 
intention of running. I am not a politician." Smart move. She had become the 
focus of the voters' frustration. 
But the new powers of her office and the siren song of incumbency seemed to 
have had an effect. She attempted to shake her foot-dragging, pro-industry 
image and established an exploratory campaign committee to raise funds. Then 
last week she abruptly announced her withdrawal from the race, in the face of 
discouraging public-opinion polls. 
Former Huntington Beach Mayor Wes Bannister, an insurance broker who promises 
to order a 20% rate rollback, is now the most visible GOP candidate for 
nomination. In the wake of Gillespie's departure, it remains to be seen whether 
a "name" Republican challenger will emerge. 
On the Democratic side, State Board of Equalization member Conway Collis, the 
only formally declared candidate, has flatly declared, "I will lower insurance 
rates." That may not be enough. 
Despite his endorsement by Proposition 103 author Harvey Rosenfield, Collis 
suffers from being "the politician" in the current Democratic pack. 
Rosenfield's support and grass-roots organization should help any Democratic 
candidate. But Collis has found it difficult to overcome the public perception 
that Rosenfield traded his support for Collis' fund-raising assistance. 
Although Los Angeles television commentator Bill Press mounted an abortive 
campaign for the Democratic nomination for U.S. Senate and served in the Edmund 
G. Brown Jr. Administration, the public doesn't seem to perceive him as a 
politician. And Press has important name recognition, particularly in Southern 
California. These are pluses. 
Press has vowed to abolish the "territorial system" of basing insurance rates 
on where drivers live (Gillespie last week directed that the territorial system 
not be the prime determinant of insurance rates). Press' promise could backfire 
when voters in other areas of California learn that their rates could rise to 
compensate for the loss of insurance revenue from currently redlined urban 
areas. 
Democrat Walter Zelman is also moving closer to a formal declaration of 
candidacy. Zelman suffers from low name-recognition but fares better when 
linked with Common Cause, the reform-oriented public interest group he served 
as California director. Using Common Cause on his ballot designation could give 
Zelman significant credibility. 
But Zelman's candidacy may promote a split among various consumer groups, and 
he must share with Press and Collis the traditional Democratic fund-raising 
founts of San Francisco and Los Angeles. 
Zelman may have other problems. He has criticized the influence of money in 
politics, yet he refused to abide by his suggested limit on campaign 
expenditures unless the other candidates agreed -- not likely. He would hold 
government to rigid standards, but his proposal restricting contributions from 
trial lawyers would exempt friends who do "a little ambulance chasing once in a 
while." (Most potential candidates have already forsworn insurance-industry 
money as the electoral kiss of death.) 
Then there is the "phantom candidate," Voter Revolt's own Harvey Rosenfield. He 
won't run for insurance commissioner himself -- perhaps he fully comprehends 
the pitfalls of direct accountability. But, dissatisfied with the 
implementation of Proposition 103, he has proposed yet another initiative -- to 
establish a state-run automobile insurance system. 
The job of insurance commissioner has not attracted high-profile candidates. 
Many officeholders view it as a "lose-lose" race. Politicians -- particularly 
legislators -- have been identified as part of the problem. The public does not 
trust them to become part of the solution. 
Some incumbents fear that this springboard to higher office could easily become 
a slide to ignominious retirement. Anyone who does the necessary job, bringing 
rationality to the insurance system, will alienate everybody -- insurers, 
consumers, attorneys. That's political suicide. 
Traditionally, the commissioner's role has been to ensure the solvency of 
companies and require a reserve adequate to protect policyholders' claims. As 
the post becomes more political, there will be pressure to "play to the crowd," 
to focus on lowering prices without acknowledging the dangers. 
A meat-ax approach to lowering insurance rates might lead to the collapse of 
weaker insurance companies, drive big insurers out of California and reduce 
competition. That would leave California policyholders as vulnerable as the 
victims of the savings-and-loan crisis. 
To duck that issue is demagoguery. It wouldn't be the first time that 
demagoguery provided the winning formula, but it won't solve the long-term 
problem. There are few incumbents willing to risk that failure and end their 
careers. 
And what about the dearth of Republicans? Deukmejian, and most other Republican 
officeholders, opposed Proposition 103; the public perceives them as too cozy 
with big business. Gillespie's departure only underscores the GOP problem. 
The events of the past year indicate that hopes that an elected commissioner 
would cut through the Gordian knot of insurance reform will not be realized, 
despite the candidates' pledges. 
In "The Wizard of Oz," Dorothy and her friends return to the wizard, having 
done everything he demanded. But he still stalls about keeping his promises. An 
angry Cowardly Lion roars, exposing -- behind all the special effects -- a 
little, old man. 
It was all just make-believe, the Wizard confesses: "I'm just a common man." 
But, wails the Scarecrow, "you're more than that -- you're a humbug!" 
No matter how sincere the candidates for the new post of California insurance 
commissioner are in their promises to bring the big, bad insurance companies to 
their knees, it's all humbug. Californians are likely to be as disappointed as 
Dorothy and her friends: Life's problems are not resolved as easily as a wizard 
-- or political candidate -- promises. 
