HOW WILL IT PLAY IN PRIBRAM? REFORMERS WORRY; 
CZECHOSLOVAKIA: THE WINDS OF DEMOCRATIC CHANGE TAKE THEIR TIME GETTING TO THE 
PROVINCES. 
The revolution is a little more tense in the Czechoslovak provinces than it is 
in Prague. 
Consider, for example, the sign posted near the door of a neighborhood Pribram 
restaurant over the weekend. "Attention!" it read. "Civic Forum was recognized 
by the government as an equal partner in conducting all social dialogue. The 
removing of posters and declarations of the Civic Forum is a sabotage of this 
dialogue." 
The good news is that the umbrella opposition group, which is leading the 
campaign for political pluralism and free elections in Czechoslovakia, has an 
outpost here in the wooded countryside about 50 miles outside the capital, 
Prague. 
The bad news is that it has enemies that have been tearing down its signs -- 
and worse. 
In fact, entrenched opponents of democratic change have been making mischief in 
many provincial towns as Czechoslovakia has gone on the political equivalent of 
fast-forward to join the revolution sweeping Eastern Europe. Their tactics 
range from threats and provocations to cutting off the town power supply when 
representatives of Civic Forum are on television. 
Civic Forum strategists in Prague say they are concerned that the party's 
central leadership, which appears to have accepted the inevitability of change, 
is no longer in control of its own local, district and regional apparatus. 
The strategists fear that these lower-level officials, possibly in partnership 
with recently deposed hard-liners from the central party organs, could trigger 
a dangerous backlash that would threaten all that has been gained in just two 
heady weeks. 
Diplomatic analysts agree that the countryside is both more conservative and 
more subject to hard-line manipulation than urban areas, but they believe that 
the Civic Forum strategists may be overstating the danger. 
"It's not that things are reversible," said one. "I don't think they are. But 
this type of thing could make it messy." 
The sense in Pribram is that although the revolution has clearly arrived, 
people are still looking nervously over their shoulders. 
"Everything is slower here," said Lenka Salkova, 25, a teacher who lives in 
Pribram and works in the capital. "In Prague, there is enthusiasm, and people 
lived (the political upheaval) right from the beginning. Here, you have to push 
people into it." 
Attempted intimidation by old-style Communist Party bosses desperately trying 
to retain their power is only one reason for this situation, and perhaps not 
even the most important. 
Pribram's main industry is uranium mining, mostly for export to the Soviet 
Union. And although the mines are rapidly playing out, the miners are among the 
most generously rewarded of Czechoslovakia's proletariat. Surrounding 
cooperative farms are also relatively well-to-do, and as a result, the standard 
of living here is good by East European standards. 
Ask an average Pole what is lacking in the stores and he will probably list 
everything from meat to toilet paper. But a Pribram homemaker listed a color 
television, automatic washing machine and a freezer. "I have a beautiful house, 
a car and a weekend place," boasted a retired technician who would not give his 
name. 
Another reason for political conservatism is that it is a lot more risky to 
stand up and be counted in the provinces. "In a small city, you haven't got the 
anonymity you do in the city," said Bohomil, 51, a Pribram engineer who also 
asked that his last name be omitted for fear of possible repercussions for his 
two children. 
"If you stand up, everybody knows who stood up," he added. "So, if there are 
any doubts that it may turn around, people in a small town are more reluctant 
to get involved." Also, noted a Western diplomat, the power of patronage 
"extends very deep in the countryside.' 
It all adds up to a greater sense of political caution in the countryside -- a 
sense clearly reflected in a weekend opinion poll distributed by the official 
CTK news agency. It showed that while 58% of the population in Prague supports 
Civic Forum, the figure including the provinces falls to 30%. 
The political difference is almost instantly clear in Pribram. Across from the 
party's cavernous marble headquarters building with the imported windows and 
gleaming steel trim are several red-and-white propaganda banners flying from 
apartment buildings and stores. The banners used to be common throughout 
Eastern Europe, but now they are rare in Prague or even Moscow. 
There aren't nearly as many opposition notices as one finds in Prague, although 
at Civic Forum's main meeting place, in the town's theater, there was one 
homemade poster urging: "Give us freedom for Christmas!" 
The retired technician, who had stopped to read the Civic Forum bulletins, 
conceded that Pribram is more conservative than Prague. But he said it is only 
"a question of time" before the political situation catches up. 
"It can't be stopped," he said. "What do people want? Nothing but justice -- 
and that we should be better off than we are. And we want it all to take place 
in calm, without any repression, in a reasonable manner." 
A week after police brutally suppressed a student march in Prague -- the Nov. 
17 incident that triggered the rapid political changes -- local party leaders 
were still saying the action was justified, even though the central authorities 
had long since backed down. 
Engineer Bohomil and his wife, Bozena, worry about a possible backlash. She 
said their college-age son called her a "reactionary" when she warned that he 
might risk being thrown out of school for his activism. "He said that it was no 
wonder we lost in 1968, if that's how cautious we were," Bozena said in a 
blushing reference to the ill-fated Prague Spring reform movement 21 years ago. 
"I told him he might see it differently, too, if there were a tank facing him," 
Bohomil added. 
In the end, youthful exuberance won out. Their son was among throngs chanting 
"Come out!" as they marched to party headquarters at a protest last week. 
When he got back to their apartment that day, Bozena recalled, her son flung 
open the door and shouted gleefully: "Mom! I welcome you to free 
Czechoslovakia!" 
