'MARKSMAN' MARK WHITFIELD KEEPS HIS EYE ON THE TARGET; 
JAZZ: THE GUITARIST, WHO WAS WEANED ON ELLINGTON AND BASIE, FINDS THAT 
RE-CREATING PAST SOUNDS MAKES HIM A GOOD LIVING IN THE PRESENT. 
"When I left school and went to New York," said the 24-year-old guitarist Mark 
Whitfield, "I had accepted in my heart that I was going to play jazz, and live 
in a small apartment in Brooklyn and just be poor for the rest of my life. 
Anything else that happened would just be a lucky break." 
As luck would have it, something else did happen. Three years ago, when the 
Berklee College of Music alumnus was jamming at a New York Club, George Benson 
heard him. Before long he was on tour with organist Jack McDuff (Benson's first 
band leader) and, through Benson's intercession, had a contract with Warner 
Bros. Records. His first album, "The Marksman," in which he is backed by Wynton 
Marsalis' rhythm section, is selling briskly. 
Last week, after a grueling but gratifying 3 1/2-week tour of Japan dueting 
with Carmen McRae, he came home to his not-too-small apartment in Baton Rouge, 
La., where he lives with his wife and 8-month-old son. Over the weekend, he 
arrived in Los Angeles to play his first two Southland dates, Tuesday at 
Elario's in La Jolla and tonight at Nucleus Nuance in West Hollywood. 
Whitfield is a maverick who shuns fusion, opts for straight-ahead jazz, and 
whenever possible avoids amplifiers. "I'm having a guitar made," he says, with 
a microphone mounted on the inside and using a wireless set-up, so I won't need 
an amp at all. That natural sound blends better with the other acoustic 
instruments." 
Raised in Lindenhurst, Long Island, Whitfield came to jazz by natural causes: 
Two parents who loved the music, raised him on Ellington and Basie records, and 
once took him to hear the Count Basie Band, where upon he fell in love with 
Freddie Green's acoustic rhythm guitar. 
"My high school band director was also a jazz fan and had played in big bands. 
A teacher in Seattle, where I lived for a year after my parents moved there, 
had played with Earl Hines. He gave me my first Charlie Christian record. I was 
15." 
Playing in the school band, he won two Berklee prizes and was offered a full 
scholarship, moving to Boston to study there in 1983. 
The experience was a mixed blessing. "The school's emphasis has changed to 
fusion. Out of the 1,000 or more guitarists who passed through Berklee during 
my four years there, I doubt that more than 10 or 15 put a serious effort into 
playing straight-ahead." 
Much of his jazz wisdom came from the records of George Benson and such 
long-gone masters as Charlie Christian and Wes Montgomery. His mind and fingers 
remain planted firmly in the mainstream. He scorns the theory that equates 
fusion with progress, or his own creative style with nostalgia. 
"This is a spontaneous music in which nothing is ever played the same way 
twice; except the style may seem nostalgic to people who grew up with it, but 
for me it's new. What the fusion players are doing -- John Scofield, Mike 
Stern, guys like that -- I wouldn't call an improvement in any way on what Wes 
Montgomery did back in the 1960s. They are good musicians, but they don't 
represent any advance." 
Whitfield realizes that the music he has embraced encompasses a broad range of 
tastes. He has begun to develop as a composer; six of the nine cuts in the 
album are his own, and at least two, "Medgar Evers Blues" and "The Marksman" 
(the title cut) shows substantial promise. 
In the wake of his discovery by Benson have come other delights, among them a 
record date for RCA with Cleo Laine that found him in the company of trumpeter 
Clark Terry and saxophonist Jane Ira Bloom. Betty Carter has sat in with his 
group. Carmen McRae, who first heard him last summer at the North Sea Jazz 
Festival in Haarlem, plans to bring him back to Los Angeles in February to play 
with her at Catalina's. 
Half a century has passed since Charlie Christian, in his historic sessions 
with Benny Goodman, set the course for modern jazz guitar. Mark Whitfield is 
one of a welcome minority whose roots go clear back to those catalytic 
recordings. 
Mark Whitfield: Tonight at Nucleus Nuance in West Hollywood: (213) 939-8666. 
