VITAL LEGACY OF NANCY CRUZAN; 
ISSUE IS NOT SO MUCH THE RIGHT TO DIE BUT THE RIGHT TO LIVE AS ONE SEES FIT 
An ambivalent U.S. Supreme Court ruling wound up giving a lower court the room 
it needed recently to halt the forced feedings of Nancy Cruzan. Without the 
feeding tubes in place to maintain her state of permanent unconsciousness, the 
33-year-old Missouri woman will die soon. While it will be a merciful end, the 
thought of it is no cause for cheer. But it is cause to appreciate what Nancy 
and parents Joe and Joyce Cruzan have given to others in the nearly eight years 
since Nancy left life as she valued it. 
Nancy Cruzan was involved a serious car accident in 1983. Since then she has 
been able to breathe on her own but has no awareness of herself or her 
surroundings. She is in what doctors call a "persistent vegetative state." Her 
parents fought -- against strict Missouri state laws and a tenacious attorney 
general's office -- to make the decision that their daughter would have made. 
Nancy Cruzan had told friends that she would not want to be fed by force or 
kept alive by machines. 
The Cruzans' cause attracted much attention to the "right-to-die"; but the 
larger importance of the Cruzan case is not the right to die, but the right to 
live as one sees fit. It is about understanding medical options and the 
consequences of accepting or refusing treatment. 
One national law that resulted from the Cruzan case takes effect late next 
year. It will require most hospitals and other health-care facilities to inform 
patients of their medical-care rights if they become incapacitated. 
In California, the legal effect of the Cruzan case has been minimal because 
state law and a state constitutional guarantee of privacy make it easier for 
next of kin or a designate to act in what is considered the best interests of 
an incapacitated person. But the publicity surrounding the Cruzan case has been 
an effective prod in persuading many people to make legal arrangements; the 
publicity also no doubt sparked many informal conversations about the case. 
Such conversations could be cited later as evidence of a person's wishes 
regarding prolonged or extraordinary medical treatment. 
Thus Nancy Cruzan's legacy is the better chance that other tragedies such as 
hers can be averted. 
