PREGNANT WOMAN WOUNDED, 6-MONTH-OLD FETUS KILLED 
A pregnant woman was shot in the stomach, killing her 6-month-old fetus, in 
what Los Angeles police termed a drug-related dispute with a 15-year-old 
alleged gang member early Saturday. 
Other victims of weekend violence included a 65-year-old Long Beach man who 
authorities say was the random victim of a drive-by shooting and a 41-year-old 
Cerritos man who was stabbed to death in his bedroom. 
Authorities say Nova Hale, 20, was shot in the stomach after an argument with a 
teen-ager in a side yard in the 2700 block of Hauser Boulevard. Hale was rushed 
to a local hospital where she was listed in critical condition, police said. 
The alleged assailant, who was not identified by police because of his age, 
fled but was arrested in his South Los Angeles home two hours later and booked 
on suspicion of murder. 
Detectives said the youth had accused Hale of stealing cocaine. 
In another incident, Clarence Long, 65, was killed in a drive-by shooting just 
before 6 p.m. Friday in the 1700 block of Olive Avenue. 
Long, a retired Navy veteran, was struck in the chest by one of a barrage of 
bullets fired randomly into a street-corner crowd from a maroon-colored car 
with two male occupants, police said. 
"Somebody in the crowd was involved in a verbal word contest . . . a couple 
hours before," said Long Beach Detective Ron Pavek. "They may have come back 
and said 'I'll show you' . . . and (Long) was just standing on the corner." 
Meanwhile, in Cerritos, a 41-year-old man was found stabbed to death in his 
bedroom Saturday morning by Los Angeles County sheriff's deputies responding to 
an emergency call from the man's wife. 
Kianfar Barkhordar, a resident of the 13400 block of Aclare Street, suffered 
multiple stab wounds to his upper torso in the 6 a.m. attack and was pronounced 
dead at the scene. A live-in baby-sitter, whose name was withheld by 
authorities, was also stabbed in the upper torso and rushed to a local hospital 
where she was listed in stable condition. 
Sheriff's Deputy George Ducoulombier said that Barkhordar's wife, whose first 
name was not released by authorities, called 911 and said in a distraught voice 
that an intruder was inside her home. 
Mrs. Barkhordar and the couple's 6-year-old son were not injured in the attack. 
"At this time the motive for the murder is unknown and there appears to be 
nothing missing from the residence," Ducoulombier said. 
In Lynwood, an alleged gang drive-by shooting killed a 22-year-old man standing 
on the sidewalk shortly after midnight Saturday. 
Sheriff's deputies said Lloyd Polk of Lynwood was hit by gunfire from a passing 
vehicle in the 11100 block of Duncan Avenue. He died 40 minutes later at St. 
Francis Medical Center. 
