COLLEGE BASKETBALL; 
BOOK STRUGGLES FOR ANSWERS IN BIAS' DEATH 
In 1986, it was one of college basketball's biggest stories. Len Bias, the 
22-year-old forward at the University of Maryland, died of a cocaine overdose 
two days after the Boston Celtics drafted him in the first round. 
If Bias represented the cutting edge of basketball style with his on-court 
blend of power and grace, his sudden, shocking death was in the vanguard of a 
new scourge, with a brutal theme that no matter how talented the individual, 
how promising his future or how true his personality, his previously charmed 
life could be taken in an instant. 
Not long after Bias' death, Cleveland Brown defensive back Don Rogers died of 
an overdose of cocaine in what was a fateful summer for young athletes, but it 
was the fatal message left by Bias that may have inspired a new awareness of 
the drug culture and how it affects athletes. 
The actual circumstances of Bias' death were never made clear. No one knows who 
bought the cocaine, no one who was in that dormitory room on the Maryland 
campus has said who brought the cocaine into the room, and no one can offer a 
complete picture of the last minutes of Len Bias' life. 
In death, Bias remains a haunted memory but also a contemporary one, the 
subject of a new book by Lewis Cole, called "Never Too Young To Die, the Death 
of Len Bias," published by Pantheon Books. 
"More than anything else, I wanted to convey the sense of longing and pain that 
people who knew Leonard might have felt," Cole said. "This is a loss that's 
happening to someone out there every day, every minute. If you feel that pain, 
maybe you'll do something about it." 
Cole, who dedicated the book to his son, Aaron, was struck by the coincidence 
of the life cycle, how he could be welcoming someone into the world while 
another one was leaving it. 
"I was riding in a cab, going to the hospital to see Aaron because he was just 
born, and I saw a newspaper clipping of Bias' death," Cole said. "It just hit 
me with a particular force. How could you ever see this happening? In some 
ways, the answer is, you can't." 
Cole does not find fault with Brian Tribble, who was charged with obstruction 
of justice and later acquitted. Tribble was in the dormitory room and called 
911 when Bias went into convulsions. If there is someone to be taken to task, 
he believes, it is the authority figures then at Maryland -- Athletic Director 
Dick Dull and Coach Lefty Driesell. 
According to court testimony and public documents, Driesell maintained publicly 
that he knew nothing about possible drug use when he actually had full 
knowledge, all the while attempting a sort of cover-up to limit his own 
involvement. 
"I think Driesell should make some sort of public apology for what he did," 
Cole said. "It wasn't just because he lied, but he lied while being so falsely 
pious." 
Driesell, who now coaches at James Madison University in Harrisonburg, Va., 
refused to comment. 
Cole said when he tried to interview Driesell for the book, Driesell was polite 
but turned him down, saying he didn't read books. 
"You can never find a hero in this story," Cole said. "With the possible 
exception of Mr. Bias (Len's father, James), there was no one who stood up for 
the truth." 
This should not be surprising, considering there is not a tidy way to find the 
truth in the way Len Bias died. It could be this may just be how the Bias story 
ends. 
"In some ways, he remains unrevenged," Cole said. "A ghost . . . a tortured 
spirit." 
The final tab: Lynn Nance is the first-year coach at Washington, replacing the 
fired Andy Russo, who coached the Huskies to a 61-62 record in four seasons and 
was paid $204,320 for the remaining two years of his contract. 
Cradle Dept.: After defeating Notre Dame Tuesday night, behind Calbert 
Cheaney's 20 points, Indiana is unbeaten in four games going into its own 
tournament, a four-team event in which the Hoosiers begin play tonight against 
South Alabama. Should Knight's Baby Bombers win, they would play the winner of 
the game between Cal State Long Beach and New Hampshire. 
Coach Bob Knight's starting lineup consists of four freshmen -- Cheaney, 
Lawrence Funderburke, Greg Graham and Chris Reynolds -- and sophomore Eric 
Anderson. Knight said he will not redshirt any of his seven-player recruiting 
class. 
He's covered: First-year Kentucky Coach Rick Pitino's picture is on the cover 
of the Wildcats' media guide, and other photos of Pitino appear on 12 of its 
first 20 pages. 
Pitino has no player taller than 6-feet-7, which means Kentucky's team is its 
smallest in 27 years. The same cannot be said for attendance. Even though NCAA 
sanctions will keep the Wildcats out of the postseason tournament and off live 
television, they have not affected tickets sales at Rupp Arena. 
Only 15 of last season's 16,000 season tickets were not reclaimed for this 
season. Those 15 were then distributed in a drawing from among 2,000 requests. 
Splish, splash: Dennis Scott of Georgia Tech showers before games, a 
superstitious practice he said he began in high school. 
Car and driver: The Las Vegas Review Journal made a lot of Nevada Las Vegas 
basketball fans angry when it investigated which cars players were driving and 
published its findings. Here is what the Review Journal said about the Runnin' 
Rebels' and their driving machines. Happy motoring: 
 -- Anderson Hunt, 1989 BMW convertible, believed to be his girlfriend's. 
 -- Stacey Augmon, 1988 Mustang GT coupe. 
 -- Greg Anthony, 1983 BMW sedan and 1986 Nissan 280-ZX. 
 -- Larry Johnson, 1989 Nissan. 
