COLOMBIA DRUG CARTEL LEADER SURRENDERS; 
COCAINE: FABIO OCHOA CITES A GOVERNMENT PROMISE OF NO EXTRADITION. 
A Medellin cartel leader wanted in the United States on murder and cocaine 
distribution charges turned himself in to Colombian authorities Tuesday as part 
of an unprecedented peace process between the government and cocaine bosses. 
Fabio Ochoa, 33, the youngest of three brothers who run the cartel together 
with Pablo Escobar, surrendered to authorities in a church just south of 
Medellin. Although four middle-level drug bosses have turned themselves in, 
Ochoa is the first of the cartel's top leaders to do so. 
Ochoa said he was surrendering under two government decrees offering drug 
traffickers lenient judicial treatment, including a promise of no extradition 
to the United States. 
In order to receive the government benefits, Ochoa must confess to at least one 
crime, according to the government's decrees. 
Justice Minister Jaime Giraldo Angel told reporters late Tuesday that he did 
not know what crime Ochoa had confessed. Although there were no indications 
Tuesday that the cartel's other leaders would follow Ochoa's lead, Giraldo said 
the government believes that they will. 
Ochoa's public statement, which referred to his surrender as an "independent 
act," indicated that the other cartel leaders may ask for more government 
concessions before surrendering. Ochoa said that the two decrees offering 
lenient treatment are "a long way off from satisfying the expectations raised 
by the government." 
Fabio Ochoa and his brothers, Juan David and Jorge Luis, first expressed 
interest in turning themselves in after President Cesar Gaviria eased the 
government's inflexible crackdown on cocaine traffickers. 
In a Sept. 5 decree, Gaviria offered surrendering suspects guarantees that they 
would not be extradited and would receive reduced prison sentences if they 
confessed to their crimes and cooperated with authorities. 
After the cartel indicated interest but asked for more guarantees, Gaviria 
responded with a second decree, issued Monday, that guarantees no extradition 
for any trafficker confessing even one crime punishable by imprisonment. The 
decree also met two other cartel demands by designating a government delegate 
to protect traffickers' rights and by stipulating that the suspects would be 
placed in special jails. 
In their extradition request for Ochoa, U.S. authorities accuse him of 
distributing cocaine and ordering the 1986 assassination of Barry Seal, an 
informant for the Drug Enforcement Administration. 
Along with his brothers, he is on the U.S. attorney general's list of the dozen 
most-wanted Colombian drug figures. 
Authorities say Ochoa personally arranged the importation of tons of cartel 
cocaine into the United States when he managed the organization's Miami 
distribution network. 
He was indicted in Baton Rouge, La., in 1986 for taking part in a murder for 
hire, conspiracy to violate civil rights and obstruction of justice. In Miami, 
he faces 1986 charges of a racketeering conspiracy to manufacture and 
distribute cocaine. In Tampa, Fla., he was indicted last year for possession of 
cocaine with intent to distribute it, engaging in a criminal enterprise, 
interstate travel in aid of racketeering and use of force to influence others. 
The cartel is also accused of masterminding a terrorist campaign that killed 
hundreds of Colombians in 1989 and early 1990. In recent months, it has 
kidnaped 10 people. 
Ochoa could be tried on charges other than the one to which he confesses, but 
he could receive a prison term of no more than 30 years, according to the 
government decrees. 
Times staff writer Ronald J. Ostrow in Washington contributed to this article. 
