CATS HAVE RAVE REACTIONS TO VIDEO OF CAVORTING BIRDS 
Steve Malarkey was a disgruntled computer technician looking for a career 
change when his cat leaped forward with an idea. 
"I was sitting in front of the TV with my wife, watching a National Geographic 
special on birds of the Cayman Islands or somewhere," he said. 
"Our cat, Stick, who never even glanced at TV before, came out of his box like 
a shot and sat right in front of the screen, growling and meowing." 
Malarkey borrowed a friend's video camera and tripod, scattered birdseed and 
popcorn in his wooded back yard and recorded the antics of neighborhood birds, 
squirrels and chipmunks that gathered for a noisy feast. 
"When I brought the tape back to the house and showed it to Stick, he went 
ballistic," Malarkey said. "He was in front of the TV, behind the TV, on top of 
the TV, knocking things over and swiping at the screen." 
Nice kitty. 
Malarkey went into the "cat business" in a big way. His "Video Catnip," a 
professional, 25-minute version of the same back yard scene, is one of the 
hottest gift items to appear on pet store shelves this Christmas season. 
Malarkey says he's sold 7,000 copies since his video hit the market in 
September, 1989, most of them in the last couple of months. Fewer than 10 tapes 
have been returned on behalf of dissatisfied feline viewers, he said. 
Human viewers might find "Video Catnip" boring after a while. There's just so 
much excitement in watching a pair of blue jays squabbling or a squirrel 
snitching a peanut from a bowl. 
But Malarkey, who recently moved from this Washington suburb to Morgantown, 
W.Va., says it's the purr-fect stocking stuffer for the indoor cat who has 
everything. 
"Steven Spielberg it ain't," he said, "but we haven't gotten any complaints yet 
from the cats." 
The tape, which retails for $19.95, promises "some cat-a-clysmic fun with no 
paws in the action." It starts with this warning: 
"While watching this video, your cat may become excited and attempt to get 
inside your television set to get at the birds. . . . We strongly suggest that 
you remove all breakables from on top or around your TV set. No kitting." 
The live action is divided into segments titled "Cheep Thrills," "Mews and 
Feather Report" and "A Stalk in the Park," which features plenty of close-up 
shots of kitty's favorite creatures cavorting on the TV screen. 
Can cats really "see" a TV video? 
Veterinarians agree with Malarkey that although cats don't discern shapes and 
colors as distinctly as humans, they are acutely aware of moving figures and 
sounds that excite them. 
