SEAHAWKS FAIL TO WARM COCKLES OF RAMS' HEARTS 
No thanks to the Seattle Seahawks, the Rams could only clench their teeth on 
Saturday. They were hoping to clinch a playoff spot. 
Shivering in anticipation of today's game against the New England Patriots, the 
Rams hoped their fate would be sealed before they braved frigid winds at 
Sullivan Stadium. The Rams could have secured a wild-card playoff spot Saturday 
had the Seahawks defeated the Washington Redskins. The Redskins won, 29-0. 
So now it's up to Ram quarterback Jim Everett and the sideline hand-warmers. 
The playoff situation: The Rams clinch a wild-card spot if they win. A victory 
also gives them home-field advantage in a wild-card game against the New York 
Giants if the Raiders defeat the Giants today and Philadelphia beats Phoenix. 
Should the Giants win the division and Philadelphia wins to finish in a tie 
with the Rams at 11-5, the Eagles will play host to the wild-card game. 
What's more, the Rams can lose today's game and still qualify if either Green 
Bay, Philadelphia, or Minnesota loses this weekend. The Packers will play 
Dallas today, while the Vikings play host to Cincinnati Monday night. 
It was so cold in New England this week that Patriots owner Victor Kiam 
reportedly gave 4,000 tickets away to area Boy Scouts in an attempt to beef up 
attendance. Nice gesture, except some complained it was more an act of child 
abuse than charity. 
Today's turnout could be the smallest at a professional football game since the 
spring league folded. This, in the wake of General Manager Dick Steinberg's 
fleeing the organization for the New York Jets. 
And yes, Doug Flutie, wonder of wonders, remains on the roster. Former Raider 
Marc Wilson, who knows a thing or two about boos, was brought in to replace 
Tony Eason, who had become such a tomato target in New England that the 
Patriots finally released him in November. 
"The environment in the stadium was so hostile that I don't think anybody could 
have made it back under those conditions," Patriot Coach Raymond Berry said of 
Eason's departure. 
Luckily, Eason caught on with the friendly New York Jet patrons. 
So now it's Wilson, but he suffered an injured index finger on his throwing 
hand in last week's loss to Pittsburgh and probably won't make it today. Which 
leaves the ageless, gray-haired veteran, Steve Grogan, to take on the Rams. 
The Patriots have used four quarterbacks this season, and they barely have a 
win apiece to show for it. 
Berry knew it was going to be rough when All-Pro linebacker Andre Tippett 
didn't make it through the exhibition season. Tippett was placed on injured 
reserve Sept. 4 because of a shoulder injury that required surgery. 
The Patriots have also had off seasons from: 
 -- Running back John Stephens. He rushed for 1,000 yards and made the Pro Bowl 
as a rookie in 1988, but a chronic ankle injury has limited him to 792 rushing 
yards and a 3.5 yards-per-carry average. 
Berry on Stephens: "He's not playing like he did a year ago. I don't think I've 
seen John play like himself more than three games all year. Being such a big 
part of our offense, it's taken its toll on us." 
 -- Receiver Irving Fryar. He has started only four games because of various 
injuries and has only 23 catches. Veteran receiver Stanley Morgan was lost 
after Week 10 after suffering a broken leg during practice. 
 -- Receiver Hart Lee Dykes. The team's first-round pick is finally coming 
around. 
"He was late to camp and was in terrible condition when he came in," Berry 
said. "He was working out of a hole." 
Dykes has dug himself out with three 100-yard receiving games since 
mid-November. 
As for quarterback Everett, his short career comes full circle in his rematch 
with the Patriots, who provided the backdrop for his NFL debut in 1986. 
Remember? Everett comes off the bench at Anaheim Stadium with his team 
trailing, 14-0, in the second quarter. His first NFL completion was a 34-yard 
scoring pass to Henry Ellard. In all, he completed 12 of 19 passes for 193 
yards and three touchdowns, and gave his team the lead in the fourth quarter. 
Remember also that it wasn't good enough, that Eason beat the Rams with a 
25-yard "Hail Mary" scoring pass to Fryar as time expired. 
Everett's hoping for a better ending this time. 
Ram Notes 
Gary Jeter, the former Ram defensive end who signed with New England as a Plan 
B free agent last spring, was placed on injured reserve Dec. 15 because of a 
strained lower back. Jeter played in 14 games this season, none as a starter, 
and finished with seven sacks for 40 yards. . . . The Patriots are 11-18 in 
season-ending games, but 4-0 in final games played at Sullivan Stadium. . . . 
Quarterback Jim Everett has only two fewer rushes this season than reserve 
running back Gaston Green, 24 to 26, and has a longer run from scrimmage, 13 to 
nine. . . . Greg Bell needs 73 rushing yards to reach 1,000 for the second 
consecutive season and the third time in his career. 
