MAKE LIFE WORTH LIVING; 
SUICIDE: THE KEVORKIAN TRIAL MAY REVIVE THE SPECTER THAT THE DISABLED HAVE NO 
REASON TO LIVE. BUT SOCIETY'S LACK OF SUPPORT IS WHAT CAUSES THEIR DESPAIR. 
The decision by Michigan prosecutors to file first-degree murder charges 
against Dr. Jack Kevorkian -- the proud inventor of a machine that makes 
suicide push-button easy -- revives a debate that we severely disabled people 
both welcome and dread. Mos of us welcome the filing of charges, yet dread that 
the trial will provide a platform for the hidden prejudices against disabled 
people -- and end with a judicial imprimatur for killing us. 
Kevorkian is not being tried for inventing the death machine, but for applying 
it. He hooked up a middle-aged woman, Janet Adkins, who had become convinced 
that she had Alzheimer's disease. Though she had consulted only one doctor 
before asking Kevorkian to connect her to his invention, he agreed to do it 
after spending part of an evening over dinner with her. 
The killing machine is a copy of a machine used in some state execution 
chambers, except that the victim pushes the button rather than a prison 
official. 
My dread concerning Kevorkian's trial is that both the prosecution and the 
defense will agree on assumptions about the lives of disabled people, as seen 
by people who have never had a severe disability. The undisabled too often 
assume that people would rather die than have a life-altering disability. 
Disabled people like me know that there is nothing natural about the desire to 
die. We know, also, that two things drive us to death. One is fear of the 
unknown. What will happen to me now that I am disabled? The other is not being 
able to get the material and psychological support necessary to sustain our 
lives. Who will feed me now that I can't feed myself? How can I bear being 
dependent on others for things I used to do for myself? These are nearly the 
same as the factors that drive the so-called able-bodied to attempt suicide. 
A decade and a half ago I lost my job. Soon I lost my wife in divorce, my home, 
and, in a very real way, my children. I was well-qualified for other jobs but I 
was 45, used a wheelchair and had hypertension acquired during my tenure as a 
hospital administrator. It would have been rough enough at 45 to find a good 
job, but add the other factors and I was in trouble. Hundreds of resumes got me 
only a few interviews and no jobs. I felt (as it turned out, accurately), that 
my management career was finished. I had, without realizing it, entered a deep 
depression. If Kevorkian had been around, I might not be writing today. Instead 
I called my HMO about a physical problem and something I said got me an 
appointment with a psychiatric social worker the next morning. Fortunately, she 
did not assume that someone severely disabled should want to die, and my HMO 
didn't have a killing machine. 
For some reason, anyone in a bed or connected to assistive machines loses 
humanity and is a target for "right to die with dignity" philosophies. Why not 
a right to live with dignity? Dying with dignity hardly lasts long enough to 
enjoy, though it is cheaper. I worry a lot because I now use a power wheelchair 
and an assistive breathing machine at night. Does that mean that I should be 
urged to die, since I can't live without life-sustaining machinery, a standard 
I often hear used to justify the deaths of fellow disabled people? 
When the trial begins, and all of the able-bodied ethicists, doctors and 
lawyers begin discussing the right to die again on "Nightline" and 
"MacNeil/Lehrer," able-bodied people should ask themselves whether they are 
sure they would want to die, and why, if they became severely disabled. I 
suggest that many would realize that the impulse comes from fear of being 
pauperized, of not getting necessary help, of being in the way, a burden, 
unloved, isolated and rejected -- which have nothing to do with the disability 
itself and everything to do with the response of society to the disabled. 
Surely, no one wants to be disabled. And it is not true that life is always 
worth living. There are cases of extreme, unrelievable pain, of total lack of 
consciousness near death, that may make understandable individual acts 
unendorsed by society. But even in extreme cases we should be careful to 
question alleged suffering. 
Are those who support Kevorkian sympathetic to the plight of a 54-year-old 
woman who, though still able, feared that she might become disabled, or are 
they concerned about their own inconvenience and expense if, say, a parent got 
Alzheimer's disease? As a society, have we decided that we can't afford to care 
for the helpless? Have we decided that medical progress has gone too far in 
preserving life and now should be used to terminate life? But what is the 
meaning of progress, if it is not about saving lives and doing our damndest to 
make these lives worth living? 
