PASTIMES: AROUND HOME; 
LINOLEUM-BLOCK PRINTING 
PRINTING CAN BE typed words or photographs on paper, or reproductions of finger 
paintings and crayon rubbings; after all, why should first-graders have all the 
fun? More sophisticated efforts involve woodcut printing and silk screening, 
but a good adult-size beginning project is linoleum-block printing. Admittedly, 
this is not the sexiest craft these days; linoleum-block printing seems to be 
popular only with serious artists and grade-school kids. A sad state of the 
art. 
Still, this is a good time of year to learn linoleum-block printing; it lends 
itself particularly well to Christmas cards (or birthday cards or party 
invitations any time). The essentials -- linoleum blocks (mounted or 
unmounted), tracing paper, carbon paper, inks, cutting tools, a tiny paint 
roller and an instrument used to rub the paper onto the inked block -- will 
cost about $40. Special paper and envelopes are available, even a printing 
press for those with a very long Christmas-card list. 
Words and numbers are arguably the most difficult elements in a design because 
they have to be etched in mirror image in order to come out right when printed. 
It is not easy to sketch, freehand, a backward number 5, for instance; it 
should be drawn in the usual way on sheer paper, the paper reversed and the 
design traced onto the block with carbon paper (most designs can be drawn 
directly onto the linoleum block before the carving begins). The basic tenet to 
keep in mind at all times: Cut away the part that should not be printed -- 
unless the design is to be reversed out of a printed background. 
About safety: The gouging tool may not look as lethal as an X-Acto knife, but 
it can do significant damage. Do not hold the block with one hand while you cut 
with the other hand. If you do, you will gouge the holding hand. You have my 
guarantee on that. 
 Most classes in linoleum-block printing are offered as part of general 
printmaking classes; these are sometimes available (telephone for class 
schedules) at Learning Tree University in Chatsworth, Golden West College in 
Huntington Beach, Santa Monica College in Santa Monica and El Camino Community 
College in Torrance. Linoleum-block printing supplies, most manufactured by 
Speedball, a division of Hunt Manufacturing Co. Inc., are available at Art 
Supply Warehouse in Westminster; H.G. Daniels in Los Angeles; Swain's in 
Glendale; Walser's in Torrance; Continental Art Supply in Reseda, and Carter 
Sexton Artist Materials in North Hollywood. 
