DON'T FENCE ME OUT; 
MUCH OF THE WEST IS STILL PUBLIC LAND, BUT YOU CAN'T ALWAYS GET THERE FROM HERE 
THE SHOWDOWN at Sixteenmile Creek was shaping up as a modern-day version of the 
shoot-out at the O.K. Corral. On one end of a damaged wood bridge stood a 
Montana rancher, his video camera aimed at 14 outdoorsmen massed on the other 
end. The hunters and fishermen had come to replace the planks the rancher had 
knocked out of the bridge and to tear down the barbed wire he had strung up to 
keep strangers away from his brother's cattle ranch. 
And Ronald B. Stevens, leader of the outdoorsmen, was not about to back down. 
"Bill, we're going to remove that fence," Stevens said. "So if you want to call 
the sheriff, you better call him now." With that, Stevens and his companions 
spent an entire summer's day ripping up barbed wire and mending the bridge 
while Bill Brainard, the rancher, shot video footage to show his lawyers later. 
At stake was entrance to hunting and fishing areas along Sixteenmile Creek, a 
stream about 45 miles northwest of Bozeman. Finally, though, Brainard's tape 
never saw the light of day. Instead of calling in the law and going to court 
for his brother, who lived in Seattle, he simply allowed the bridge to be 
rebuilt and remain open. 
The confrontation at Sixteenmile Creek a year ago was resolved peacefully. But 
it is a good example of a conflict being played out all across the United 
States. The battle pits landowners entitled to privacy and control of their own 
property against outdoorsmen entitled to access to public lands. Few Americans 
realize that many of the roads leading through or to their favorite woods, 
beaches and fishing streams cut across someone's land. Twenty years ago, it 
didn't matter much. Farmers and ranchers, especially in the West, traditionally 
allowed unrestricted access through their property. 
But the Western ethic is changing rapidly as use of the wide-open spaces 
increases. More people, particularly urban dwellers, want to make a home away 
from home on the range, and more landowners want them to go back where they 
came from. As the conflict has intensified, others have been drawn into the 
fray: public officials from the U.S. Forest Service and the U.S. Bureau of Land 
Management, environmentalists who see threats to wildlife and public resources, 
and so-called outfitters, who depend on out-of-the-way, well-stocked game 
preserves to make a living as wilderness guides. 
The private-versus-public issue has cropped up in Colorado, where an Aspen 
landowner and local groups have fought for more than two years over passage to 
Hunter Creek, a popular picnic area. Three years ago in Idaho, 
singer-songwriter Carole King provoked a furor by winning the right to close a 
road, leading to the Salmon River, on her ranch in the Sawtooth Mountains. Last 
year in Wyoming, a band of residents marched to the top of Elk Mountain to 
protest a rancher's plan to build a private "safari" resort around the peak, 
which is U.S. Forest Service land. Farther west, the public's right to walk to 
river banks and beaches has triggered dissension along the American River near 
Sacramento and along the coastline in Oxnard Shores. The state established the 
coastal commission in 1976 to handle multiplying conflicts over access to 
California's more than 1,000 miles of beach. 
But nowhere is the controversy over access to public lands more heated than in 
southwest Montana, a breathtaking panorama of snow-dusted mountains intersected 
by gorgeous valleys through which some of the finest fishing streams on the 
continent flow. It is here that large parcels of ranchland have been bought in 
the past few years by the rich and famous, including movie stars Dennis Quaid 
and Brooke Shields and media heavyweights Tom Brokaw and Ted Turner (who bought 
a 128,000-acre Montana ranch in 1989). 
The controversy "verges on open warfare," according to a recent study by the 
National Wildlife Federation. Who are the combatants? On one side are the 
people for whom government property is one enormous playground. Hunters, 
fishermen, backpackers and bird-watchers flock to the open spaces in a quest 
for trophy elk, fat rainbow trout or simply a bit of solitude. Many of these 
outdoorsmen arrive on foot and don't want roads to their favorite places built. 
Yet each season, they are disturbed to find new fences smeared with orange 
paint -- the Montana no-trespassing symbol -- which prevent them from reaching 
thousands of acres they have visited in the past. 
Like outdoorsmen, motorized sportsmen -- snowmobilers, dirt bikers and 
4-wheel-drive enthusiasts -- are eager to head for the hills, if only for a day 
or a weekend. Once there, however, they sometimes build fires where they 
shouldn't; leave gates ajar, allowing livestock to wander off, and shoot rifles 
indiscriminately. 
Not surprisingly, such carelessness angers the quieter outdoorsmen and rural 
residents as well. Longtime Montanans who once welcomed traditional 
field-and-stream types and wealthy out-of-staters who have moved to the area in 
the last 20 years are alarmed by the reckless hordes encroaching on their 
privacy. 
"Hordes" can mean five or 50 trucks of hunters on a November weekend. That may 
not sound like much to a veteran of the Hollywood Freeway, but by the standards 
of a state like Montana -- fourth-largest in size and 44th in population, it's 
an invasion. 
This "not-in-my-back-yard" attitude, in turn, inflames people such as Ron 
Stevens and Lewis E. (Gene) Hawkes, president and executive director, 
respectively, of Public Land Access Assn., a Montana coalition dedicated to 
upholding the right of all citizens to gain access to federal and state land. 
Many of these people, who were raised on small ranches or in small Western 
towns and cities, are infuriated that a few "haves" can seal off public rights 
of way through their property. Said one Montanan: "The big shots lock things up 
tighter than a drum." 
RON STEVENS, a 53-year-old native Montanan, strapped a six-shooter on his hip 
just in case we met unfriendly animals as we hiked up a trail from Ennis Lake. 
Smiling, he quoted a favorite passage from John Steinbeck: "Montana is what 
little boys think of when they hear Texans talk about Texas." 
It was a warm summer morning, and he and Gene Hawkes were about to show me how 
one landowner tried to block the public's entrance to a chunk of Montana that 
they believe everyone should be able to enjoy. Along a trail between a rocky 
ridge and granite-faced mountains, we paused to take in the view. "See this?" 
Hawkes said, sweeping his arm at the landscape. "This is your ranch." 
"All Montanans are ranchers," Stevens chimed in. "Their ranch is the Big Sky 
ranch, and it includes 8.1 million acres of BLM land, 10.2 million acres of 
National Forest and 5.2 million acres of state school-trust land. Our brand is 
the Flying R, which stands for freedom to recreate." 
Stevens is an avid hunter and backpacker who waited years to return to the 
pleasures of "the last best place," as Montanans like to call their state. A 
career Army officer, he retired as a colonel in 1987 and moved to Bozeman 
because maps showed vast stretches of public land surrounding the city. "I 
didn't want to have to keep asking ranchers for permission to go on their 
land," Stevens explained as a red tail hawk circled over our heads. But soon 
after settling in, he discovered that much of that public land had been 
practically sealed off. 
Ranchers had put gates across trails that were, in his opinion, the only 
accessible routes into the Gallatin and Madison river valleys and the mountains 
that soared above them. When he learned that Hawkes, a retired Forest Service 
supervisor, had formed a citizens group in 1985 to fight such closures, Stevens 
immediately signed on. 
The skirmish that put Public Land Access on the map involved the Windy Water 
Ranch. Tucked away in a corner of southwest Montana near Yellowstone National 
Park, Windy Water is a 2,390-acre tract of rolling alpine meadow surrounded by 
the Rockies, dotted with sage and matted with stands of conifers. It borders on 
a national forest, including a pristine, splendidly isolated elk ground called 
Cowboys Heaven. 
The ranch was bought in 1986 by millionaire Robert M. Lee, owner of Hunting 
World, an exclusive sporting goods store in New York City. Hoping to provide a 
"protected habitat" for game animals, Lee later decided to close a portion of 
what locals knew as the Old Indian Trail where it passed through his land. 
"Hunting pressure" from outfitters "has been so heavy in recent years," he 
explained in a letter to the Forest Service in 1987, that mature bull elk were 
seldom seen in the area. 
Even though the original route of the Bannack Indians had been changed by a 
previous owner, the Old Indian Trail was the route many hunters took to reach 
two prime elk regions, including Cowboys Heaven. 
At 63, Hawkes is a feisty Idaho native whom opponents regard as a hothead. He 
organized Public Land Access to give voice not only to hunters and fishermen 
but also to "motorcyclists, 4-by-4s, snowmobilers, backcountry horsemen, all of 
'em." Once he heard about the planned closing of the Old Indian Trail, he wrote 
Lee and warned that if Public Land Access didn't hear from him within 10 days, 
the group would sue. 
According to Hawkes, Lee "didn't try to negotiate. He just put up 'No 
Trespassing' signs. It was the arrogance of a big out-of-state landowner who 
came and said the hell with local people that got him in trouble." 
Public Land Access sued Lee on the grounds that the trail was a prescriptive 
right of way -- that is, a historically used route -- and thus public. In a 
landmark decision in 1988, the first in which a state court declared a trail 
public by prescription, a Madison County District Court judge ruled in favor of 
Public Land Access. (Although Lee did not return "If it's too easy to hunt, 
pretty soon there won't be anything left to hunt." 
Forest Service officials, sportsmen's groups and the Public Land Access counter 
that some outfitters, in order to stifle competition from non-guided local 
hunters and to ensure a high quality elk herd for their clients, are 
encouraging ranchers to lease private land for exclusive use by fee hunters and 
to close roads through their property to the forest beyond. 
The effect is what Rich Day, a spokesman for the Montana Wildlife Federation, 
calls "the privatization of wildlife." Large spreads are turning into "game 
ranches" that isolate public land for exclusive use by affluent visitors. 
PART OF THE PROBLEM in the West can be traced to the days of Abraham Lincoln, 
when the government divided much of the Rocky Mountain region into a 
checkerboard pattern. To encourage the building of rail lines, the government 
gave railroad companies every other square mile of land. 
Over the years, squares of the checkerboard were consolidated into larger 
blocks of private and public land. Much private land passed into the hands of 
ranchers or timber companies owned by railroads, such as Plum Creek Timber, a 
subsidiary of Burlington Northern Railroad. By closing a road leading to 
government land, ranchers and timber companies can block access to not only 
land in an adjacent square but also territory miles away. 
Bob Gibson, supervisor of the Gallatin National Forest, fears that access 
problems will only grow worse in the future, especially as more large private 
tracts of land are subdivided into retreats for wealthy part-time Montanans. 
Right now, he says, there are numerous places along the boundaries of the 
1.7-million-acre forest where access is inadequate. 
In 1987, the Forest Service published a management plan identifying 48 
additional access points deemed necessary in Gallatin alone. But it was soon 
attacked by a raft of conservation organizations. 
"Everyone agrees that in cases where public land is landlocked and private 
landowners block access, the Forest Service should do something," said Michael 
Scott of the Wilderness Society in Bozeman. "Where the consensus breaks down is 
(deciding) what constitutes reasonable access." Unlike Public Land Access, the 
Wilderness Society generally prefers hiking and horse trails to roads. 
"The charm of Cowboys Heaven is its isolation," Scott said. "The wildlife is 
better. There are fewer people. If you put roads everywhere, you (put) stress 
(on) wildlife and cut trees." 
"We're not pushing high-standard roads," Gibson countered, adding that the 
agency simply wants to offer the public reasonable ways to use the land. To 
that end, the Forest Service has negotiated several land exchanges. These are 
complex arrangements that can require having a nonprofit group to buy private 
land to donate to the public, and the government favors such transactions 
because they leave all sides happy. 
In Paradise Valley, the lush land bordering the Yellowstone River from 
Livingston, Mont., to the edge of Yellowstone National Park, Gallatin National 
Forest officials have played a part in several successful land exchanges, one 
involving two Hollywood celebrities and another involving the controversial 
Church Universal and Triumphant. 
One fight began over land owned by actor Warren Oates and "The Wild Bunch" 
director Sam Peckinpah. Along with friends such as writer Tom McGuane and actor 
Peter Fonda, the two men were among the literature and film crowd that gave 
Paradise Valley a reputation as a trendy enclave. 
According to Joseph Swindelhurst, their Livingston lawyer, Oates bought 
property from McGuane in the 1970s and then sold half to Peckinpah. The parcel 
included a road along Sixmile Creek, the principal entrance to a portion of the 
rugged Absaroka Beartooth Wilderness. At first, it was open to everyone. 
Then, in 1975, Oates and a local sportsmen's group quarreled bitterly because 
the actor had begun to close the route occasionally. In the ultimate standoff, 
the sportsmen drove a bulldozer up the road. Swindelhurst recalled that "Oates 
went berserk," sued the county to get the road declared private and won. After 
the Montana Supreme Court upheld the decision in 1978, Oates locked a gate 
across the road for good. 
Following the deaths of Oates in 1982 and Peckinpah in 1984, their children 
decided to sell the land. Seeing an opportunity to regain access to the 
Absaroka Beartooth Wilderness, the Forest Service stepped in. So did the Trust 
for Public Land, one of the nation's largest land conservancies, which buys and 
donates to the public land important for recreation and open-space uses. 
In 1988, the Trust for Public Land acquired about 500 acres of the 
Oates-Peckinpah property for the Forest Service in exchange for four scattered 
parcels of public land elsewhere. The deal opened up 25,000 acres that had been 
shut off for more than a decade. 
Another nonprofit group, the Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation, has obtained land 
in Paradise Valley to make sure that large portions of the Gallatin National 
Forest and the Yellowstone ecosystem remain undeveloped and open to visitors. 
The Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation intervened as land broker to solve a conflict 
between the public and the Church Universal and Triumphant. The cult, formerly 
based in Calabasas, Calif., and led by Elizabeth Clare Prophet (known to her 
followers as Guru Ma), became the largest landowner in Park County in the 1980s 
when it bought Malcolm Forbes' 12,000-acre spread, and three other parcels 
bordering Yellowstone Park that totaled about 18,000 acres. 
The church caused consternation in Montana by fencing off its land and building 
bomb shelters on it. (At one time, Guru Ma predicted the Armageddon in the 
spring of 1990, then backed off when it didn't occur.) The conflict with local 
people escalated spring when three of the church's 20,000-gallon 
underground-oil storage tanks sprang leaks. 
Several years ago, the Forest Service considered bringing condemnation 
proceedings against the church to regain access to parkland through its 
property. Rather than pursue the long, costly hearings to condemn the land, 
though, the federal agency, the state and the Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation 
bought 3,400 acres of church land last year donated it to the federal agency. 
The Forest Service then set aside the property as an elk habitat. 
SUCH LAND EXCHANGES are "win-win" deals, according to Mike Williams, head of 
recreation and land in the Gallatin National Forest. Many conservationists 
agree that donations of land to organizations such as the Nature Conservancy or 
the Trust for Public Land is the most equitable solution to the problems of 
access throughout the West. Environmental groups are pleased because these 
arrangements typically prevent large chunks of undeveloped land from being 
subdivided by future owners. The Forest Service also benefits because it avoids 
confrontations or condemnation proceedings. Owners are happy because they 
either are paid for their land or receive a tax break for donating it. 
"In 18 years, we have acquired over $500 million worth of real estate in 37 
states," said Craig Lee of the Trust for Public Land's Seattle office, which 
handled the Sixmile exchange. 
But it is important to note that the Trust for Public Land and other 
conservancy groups usually deal only with willing sellers. So although land 
exchanges have decided several cases, they by no means can be expected to work 
in every instance. And however Montana and other Western states handle their 
access problems, the disputes are bound to proliferate. 
After a yearlong study, the Keystone Center in Colorado, a nonprofit 
organization devoted to resolving difficult public policy conflicts, stated 
flatly that the access issue was at a critical stage. In the 1988 study, 
Keystone also called for a national task force on access. So far, that call has 
gone unheeded. 
In the meantime, the problem is not only "a question of signs and fences, maps 
and enforcement personnel," noted Derrick Crandall of the American Recreation 
Coalition, a nonprofit federation of private recreation interests. Americans, 
Crandall declared, must also learn to "treat their back yards with love and 
respect -- as those who live with nature in the West have historically." 
