USC'S SAMPLE BRINGS IMAGE OF A HARD-DRIVING MAN; 
EDUCATION: HE PUSHED SUNY BUFFALO INTO THE BIG LEAGUES. HIS ATTENTION TO 
STUDENTS, FACULTY IS QUESTIONED. 
Especially on a slushy winter day, the stark and modernistic campus of the 
State University of New York seems about as far as you can get in American 
academia from the rosy-brick quadrangles and bicycle paths at USC. 
Many classroom buildings at SUNY Buffalo are connected with second-story 
walkways so students and teachers can avoid the infamous snowstorms that blow 
in from Lake Erie. Nowhere can be seen a skateboard or a Frisbee. Nowhere is 
there a statue commemorating althlete-warriors overlooking sunny lawns. 
The differences are not just climate and architecture. SUNY Buffalo is a public 
institution in a state dominated by liberals while USC is a private school with 
a conservative ethos. From a suburban location, SUNY Buffalo is the dominant 
university in an economically depressed region while distinctly urban USC 
competes for academic respect in vibrant Los Angeles. 
Yet now the schools have something in common: Steven B. Sample. SUNY Buffalo's 
president since 1982, Sample is to become president of USC on March 31, it was 
announced last week. 
Sample will bring cross-country a reputation as an immensely energetic 
administrator who pushed SUNY Buffalo into the big league of research grants 
and honors. He will carry to a much larger city an image of someone who enjoyed 
being a civic power player for the community's betterment. 
Yet he also leaves some bitterness as a president who, critics charge, favored 
expensive projects to generate publicity, while not paying enough attention to 
daily concerns of students and faculty. 
"He's a gunner, really in a positive way. If there are things to be stirred up 
in the positive sense, Steven Sample will do it," said William Miller, the 
dental school professor who is chairman of SUNY Buffalo's faculty senate. "Even 
his detractors admit he's been a very good president. He's made us aware of 
what we can be. Not only that, but he's got us moving in that direction." 
His aides depict Sample, 50, as a hard-driving man who disrupts their personal 
lives with late-night and weekend telephone calls on university issues. They 
describe him as a fast tracker, someone who earned a doctorate in electrical 
engineering from the University of Illinois at Urbana at age 24, had a tenured 
professorship at Purdue by 29, was second in command at the University of 
Nebraska at 33, became a SUNY president at 41 and has been head-hunted by 
several schools other than USC recently. But, even with the pressure, they said 
working with him has been fun. 
Robert J. Wagner, SUNY Buffalo's vice president for university services, 
advises USC staff to take vacations before Sample comes West "because once he 
gets there, it's going to be nonstop. It's a high commitment but Steve doesn't 
ask you to do something he doesn't do himself." 
Many people in Buffalo say Sample and USC are a good match, despite the fact 
that Sample's entire education and career have been at state schools. They say 
he has been chafing at the bit for years to run a university without the 
oversight and politics involved in a state system of many campuses. His 
feelings reportedly became more acute as New York entered its current budget 
crunch. 
"I suppose that private universities have money problems too. But the chain of 
command is different," explained M. Robert Koren, the attorney who is chairman 
of SUNY Buffalo's local governing board. And it's not that Sample doesn't know 
how to lobby politicians well, he added. "If we have to sell something, he can 
sell it without leaving anyone mad," Koren explained. 
In addition, his friends say Sample's Midwestern roots and corporate demeanor 
will make him more at home at USC than at a school which in the '70s overtly 
strove to become the "Berkeley of the East" in more ways than one. Sample says 
he has no political affiliation and that any depiction of SUNY Buffalo as 
politically radical is wrong. 
"In some respects, there is probably more congruence between Steve Sample the 
person and the students and faculty at USC than here," said Robert H. Rossberg, 
Buffalo's interim dean of arts and letters. "He is essentially a conservative 
and traditionalist and this campus tends to be left of center. Sometimes the 
students here shocked him and he did a good job of hiding it." 
For example, the law school faculty and students in 1988 tried to stop the U.S. 
Marines from recruiting young lawyers on campus because of military rules 
against homosexuals. Last May, Sample ruled that federal and state laws 
sanction those military policies and that he could not deny recruiters their 
freedom of speech and action. In response, law students filed a still pending 
complaint with the the New York State Division on Human Rights. 
His staff says Sample's handling of the matter was telling. His ruling was a 
carefully researched, 15-page document issued during spring exams when the 
school newspaper was closed and protests were difficult to organize. "He is an 
engineer, not a philosopher," said one high-ranking dean. He likened Sample's 
methodical approach in policy questions to the way the university president 
earned five patents for electrical inventions, including a control device used 
in millions of microwave ovens. 
To the annoyance of some other SUNY leaders, Sample seems at times to hide the 
fact that his campus is part of the 64-campus SUNY system. He refers to the 
school as the University at Buffalo or UB, with no SUNY in the title, partly in 
recognition that the school was private before 1962. And, Sample repeatedly 
describes his university as state-assisted, not state-supported, a reference to 
the fact that nonstate funds for research and programs have tripled during his 
presidency and now make up about half of the school's budget. 
That boost in research dollars was key to SUNY Buffalo's gaining membership 
last year in the Assn. of American Universities, the organization of top 
research schools, now numbering 58, including USC. 
But the emphasis also earned Sample criticism. For example, a recent survey 
answered by about 40% of tenured professors said that Sample did a fair to poor 
job in encouraging faculty who don't bring in outside money. The Sample 
administration called the survey unscientific and reflective mainly of 
disgruntled employees. 
"There were all sorts of flash-bang research grant money. But many of us feel 
that undergraduate teaching, despite what Sample says, did not take the front 
seat," said Harvey Axlerod, president of United University Professions, the 
faculty and staff union. "I would say he polished his gems and let the rest get 
dusty." 
Among those gems is the national earthquake research center, which SUNY Buffalo 
and other New York schools won, with much controversy, over California 
universities in 1986. Another is the World University Games, an international 
collegiate sports competition, which Buffalo will host in 1993, much of it 
played at the school. 
Sample also fought hard to upgrade sports and bring a fraternity row to SUNY 
Buffalo -- features so entrenched at USC that they help define the place. After 
failing in 1984, Sample helped win approval from SUNY trustees two years later 
to allow athletic scholarships. SUNY Buffalo, as a result, is in the midst of 
moving its teams from Division III to high-profile Division I. But Sample lost 
a campaign to use state bonds and campus property to build homes for sororities 
and fraternities, now scattered off campus. 
Both efforts, he said, were geared to improve student life. SUNY Buffalo is 
universally conceded to be a sterile place of high-rise dormitories and 
labyrinth classroom buildings seemingly designed to avoid much socializing 
among its 27,000 students, about the same enrollment as USC. 
Given that USC already ranks nationally in the top 25 schools for research 
spending and has a vibrant student and sports life, what are Sample's plans for 
it? 
His Buffalo provost, William Greiner, said that USC probably appealed to Sample 
because it feels it is the academic underdog to cross-town rival UCLA. "In New 
York, what counted were the privates (schools) like Cornell, Columbia, NYU, 
Hamilton. UB and SUNY were underdogs nine years ago," Greiner explained. "We 
may not be on the same level in all matters as Cornell now but we sure as hell 
compete. His challenge is to make USC be taken as seriously as UCLA or 
Berkeley. Give him a few years and he'll do it." 
Student leaders complain that Sample was too remote, too involved in off-campus 
activities. But they add he has become more accessible since students tried to 
storm his office in September in a protest over fees for previously free bus 
service. "That was the biggest thing on campus in 20 years," recalled Ian 
Aronson, editor-in-chief of the campus newspaper, the Spectrum. "And it seemed 
to have surprised him." 
Kelly Sahner, president of the undergraduate association, said she respects 
Sample very much and hopes he carries to USC the lesson of the fee protest -- 
stay close to student concerns. "Maybe the balmy weather will loosen him up," 
Sahner quipped. "I sometimes joke that maybe he thinks if he loosens his tie 
his head will fall off." 
Sample was back in his Buffalo office Friday after two days of ceremonial 
meetings in Los Angeles, where his USC appointment was announced Wednesday. 
Looking rested despite the rush of events, he was wearing his signature dark 
suit and tie. He joked with a reporter who previously described him as slim, to 
the great amusement of Sample's family. The president unbuttoned his jacket and 
pinched a stomach not noticeable before and proceeded to sip a glass of what he 
said was very low-calorie water. 
Sample said he took comments about his alleged distance from students as 
favorable to him: "It means they want to see me more." He stressed it is 
difficult for any university president to devote as much time as he would like 
to meetings with students and faculty. Besides, he added: "The essential 
relationship of a university is between teacher and student, not university 
president to student politician, not president to faculty, not faculty to 
faculty." The recent establishment of honors seminars for undergraduates and a 
new program to strengthen freshmen curricula at Buffalo were designed to 
strengthen that link to teachers. 
He insisted it is still too early to announce any plans for USC. But he 
conceded that the USC trustees "very much want USC's reputation raised 
nationally and internationally as a center of institutional excellence." USC 
trustees want Sample to work also on social and economic problems in the 
neighborhoods just outside the campus boundaries. 
The difficulty of both challenges in Southern California may have been 
reinforced when UCLA Chancellor Charles E. Young and Caltech President Thomas 
E. Everhart telephoned Friday to offer congratulations. 
"I really have a lot of learning to do, I mean a lot, about USC, about Los 
Angeles, about Southern California," Sample said shortly afterward. "It is a 
very complex and exciting urban environment. . . . I hope to learn from Chuck 
(Young) and Tom (Everhart) about some of the things the research universities 
can do for Los Angeles and Southern California." 
In Buffalo, Sample was the only nonbusinessman in the so-called Group of 18, a 
committee of powerful leaders working, with some success, to lift Buffalo from 
the collapse of its smokestack industries to a future of high technology and 
free trade with Canada. 
"Buffalo suffers from an image problem. So to have a university that claims to 
be one of the top research universities in the country is a big deal," said 
Stanford Lipsey, publisher of the Buffalo News, and himself a member of the 
Group of 18. According to Lipsey, Sample "knows how to round up a consensus, 
politically and financially, and knows how to do it with grace." 
On the other hand, English professor George Hochfield said such ties with the 
establishment did little to aid education. "All the businessmen in town, all 
the politicians, all the self- nominated big shots all embraced Sample. But 
what do they know about intellectual life?" asked Hochfield, who has sharply 
criticized SUNY Buffalo's move to Division I sports and the centralized nature 
of the Sample administration. Hochfield alleged that Sample is overly 
interested in public relations and his own career advancement. 
A modern university has a responsibility to help society, countered Sample. 
And, he says he never took claim for SUNY Buffalo's improved reputation. 
"I think I've made it possible for other people to bring about change and work 
for excellence and make it possible for us to be more competitive as a 
university. I would describe myself as more of a facilitator of change than a 
director of change," said the man who will become USC's 10th president. "What I 
really like about this kind of work is to see an idea that is struggling to be 
born and help make it happen. That's really satisfying." 
